
\ j r jj ] 

iTj k 

Til 

mlHII 

I p 1 

l^iji | 









[raisefor Getting To Know the 
President from Robert M. Gates , 
former Director of Central 
Intelligence (1991-93) and 
Assistant to the President and 
Deputy National Security Advisor 
(1989-91): “In the American 
Government, the Central 
Intelligence Agency is uniquely 
an instrument of the president. 

Yet no presidential memoir 
recounts the president's view 
of the part played by the CIA 
in shaping his national security 
policies or describes the 
president's personal interaction 
with his Director of Central 
Intelligence. In Getting To Know 
the President, John Helgerson for 
the first time offers an eyewitness 
history of the early encounters 
between 10 presidents and the 
CIA. Factual insightful and 
full of anecdotes, Helgerson's 
book is a major contribution 
to the literature of intelligence 
and , more important, to the 
history■ of the modern American 
presidency. ” 


Mr. Gates is the author of a forthcoming 
hook on how five presidents fought 
and won the Cold War. 


Als CIA y s Deputy Director for 
Intelligence under President 
George Bush , John Helgerson 
organized and presented foreign 
intelligence briefings for A rkansas 
Governor Bill Clinton , a service 
first offered to candidate Dwight 
D. Eisenhower by President Harry 
Truman in 1952. 

Dr. Helgerson has researched 
Agency records and interviewed 
past candidates and CIA briefers 
to produce this account of the 
contents , circumstances , and 
consequences of CIA brie fings 
offered to all the major 
Presidential candidates from 
Eisenhower to Clinton. Getting To 
Know the President probes deep 
within the national security 
apparatus of our government and 
reveals for the first time the 
workings of a tiny but vital cog — 
the mechanism that prepares 
Presidents to absorb and deal with 
secret foreign intelligence even 
before the election results are 
known. The book also casts light on 
the Presidents Daily Brief, the 
publication the CIA tailors to each 
new President 'for your eyes only" 


Although written for the edification of 
CIA officials, Dr. Helgerson's account 
will he of interest to all students of 
government, including presidential 
aspirants and their staffs. 


' 











Getting To Know 
the President 


CIA Briefings of 
Presidential Candidates 

1952-1992 


John L. Helgerson 

The Center for the Study of Intelligence supports research 
and publishing on the intelligence profession and its various 
disciplines and declassifies historical records related to US 
intelligence analyses and operations during the Cold War 
The Center welcomes inquiries from intelligence professionals 
and scholars about its programs and publications. 


V CENTER for the 
y" STUDY of INTELLIGENCE 


Central Intelligence Agency 
Washington, D.C. 20505 
Fax (703) 243-8343 





To Martha, 
Katherine, and Paul 




John L. Helgerson 


Mr. Helgerson received his B.A. degree in Political Science from 
Saint Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota. He received an M.A. and 
Ph.D. in Political Science from Duke University in Durham , North Caro¬ 
lina. 


Mr. Helgerson served in the late 1960s as a Research Affiliate in the 
University of Zambia in Lusaka. Before joining the CIA in 1971, he was 
Assistant Professor of Political Science at the University of Cincinnati, 
specializing in International Relations. His academic publications were in 
the fields of legislative behavior and African politics. 

During his career at CIA, Mr. Helgerson worked primarily in the 
Agency s analytic components, focusing on the Middle East, Africa, and 
Latin America. He served as Assistant National Intelligence Officer for 
the Near East and South Asia, Deputy Director of Near Eastern and South 
Asian Analysis, and Director of African and Latin American Analysis. 

In more recent years, Mr. Helgerson served as Associate Deputy 
Director for Intelligence, Director of Congressional Affairs, and—from 
1989 to 1993—Deputy Director for Intelligence. 


v 




Contents 


Foreword. ix 

Preface. xiii 

Introduction. 1 

Chapter 1. Briefing Governor Clinton in Little Rock. 5 

Chapter 2. Truman and Eisenhower: Launching the Process. 25 

Chapter 3. Into Politics With Kennedy and Johnson . 47 

Chapter 4. Nixon and Ford: Uneven Access. 79 

Chapter 5. In-Depth Discussions With Carter . 105 

Chapter 6. Reagan and Bush: A Study in Contrasts. 129 

Chapter 7. Concluding Observations . 149 














Foreword 


Getting To Know the President 


CIA Briefings of 
Presidential Candidates 
1952-1992 


This is an important and original book. How world leaders under¬ 
stand or misunderstand, use or fail to use, the intelligence available to 
them is an essential but still under-researched aspect both of modem gov¬ 
ernment and of international relations. The making of the American 
intelligence community has transformed the presidency of the United 
States. Before the First World War, the idea that the United States might 
need a foreign intelligence service simply did not occur to most Ameri¬ 
cans or to their presidents. After the war, Woodrow Wilson publicly poked 
fun at his own pre-war innocence: “Let me testify to this, my fellow citi¬ 
zens, I not only did not know it until we got into this war, but I did not 
believe it when I was told that it was true, that Germany was not the only 
country that maintained a secret service!” Wilson could scarcely have 
imagined that, less than half a century later, the United States would be an 
intelligence superpower. Though the intelligence nowadays available to 
the President is, like all human knowledge, incomplete and fallible, it 
probably exceeds—at least in quantity—that available to any other world 
leader past or present. 

The starting point for the study of relations between presidents and 
their intelligence communities since the Second World War are the brief¬ 
ings they receive from the CIA before their inauguration. John L. Helger- 
son is well equipped to write this path-breaking study of these briefings. A 
political scientist before joining the CIA, he served as the Agency’s Dep¬ 
uty Director for Intelligence during the Bush administration and was head 
of the team that briefed Bill Clinton in Little Rock after the 1992 election. 
In addition to having access to classified files, Mr. Helgerson has inter¬ 
viewed previous Agency briefers and all surviving former Presidents. 


IX 



Both briefers and former Presidents are agreed on the simple but 
important fact that each President is different. Presidents differ more 
widely in their previous knowledge and experience of intelligence than in 
their grasp of most other areas of government. Harry Truman entered the 
Oval Office in April 1945 almost wholly ignorant of intelligence matters. 
His determination that no future president should take office as unin¬ 
formed as he had been is partly responsible for the intelligence briefing 
offered to all presidential candidates since 1952. Unlike Truman, Dwight 
D. Eisenhower did not need to be persuaded of the importance of intelli¬ 
gence. Ike was the first President since George Washington already expe¬ 
rienced in the use of intelligence when he took the oath of office. He 
wrote after the Second World War that “intelligence had been of priceless 
value to me...and, in no small way, contributed to the speed with which 
the enemy was routed and eventually forced to surrender.” 

Recent presidents have varied almost as greatly in their experience of 
intelligence as Truman and Eisenhower. Agency briefers found Presidents 
Reagan and Bush, in Mr. Helgerson’s words, “virtual polar opposites.” 
Despite Ronald Reagan’s membership in 1975 of the Rockefeller Com¬ 
mission on CIA activities within the United States, he had no previous 
experience as an intelligence consumer and felt the need for generality. 
Bush, by contrast, was the first former Director of Central Intelligence, 
with the arguable exception of George Washington, to be elected presi¬ 
dent. He had a closer working relationship than any previous president 
with the CIA. Like Reagan, President Clinton had no previous experience 
as an intelligence consumer. 

Mr. Helgerson provides the first detailed account of the way in which 
Agency briefers have attempted, with varying success, to adapt briefings 
to the differing experience, priorities, and working patterns of successive 
presidents. One of the earliest changes in the new administration is usu¬ 
ally the format of the President's Daily Brief probably the world’s small¬ 
est circulation, most highly classified, and—in some respects—best 
informed daily newspaper. Some presidents, it appears, like it to include 
more humor than others. On average, about 60 percent of the items cov¬ 
ered in the President's Daily Brief do not appear in the press at all, even in 
unclassified form. 

The most important lesson of this book is that, if the CIA is to pro¬ 
vide effective intelligence support to policymakers, there is no substitute 
for direct access to the President. There is the implied lesson also that, if 
presidents are to make the best use of the CIA, they need to make clear to 
the Agency at regular intervals what intelligence they do and do not want. 
As a result of his own experience as DCI, Bush plainly took this lesson to 
heart. Some presidents, however, have provided little feedback. 


\ 


x 



Most good books leave the reader wanting more. Getting To Know 
the President is no exception. As well as holding the interest of his read¬ 
ers, Mr. Helgerson will also increase their curiosity. What, for example, 
were the exotic and closely-held methods or the sensitive human-source 
and technical collection programs on which DCI George Bush briefed 
President-elect Jimmy Carter? Just as it is reasonable for readers to ask 
questions such as these, so it is also reasonable on some occasions for 
intelligence agencies to avoid precise replies in order to protect their 
sources and methods. 

There is an inevitable tension between the curiosity of readers and 
scholars on the one hand and the security-consciousness of intelligence 
agencies on the other. Historians and intelligence officers are unlikely ever 
to reach complete agreement on how much of the past record can be 
declassified without compromising current operations. In recent years, 
however, the CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence has gone further 
than most of the world’s major intelligence agencies in opening up some 
of its records to historical research, publishing important volumes of doc¬ 
uments on subjects such as the Truman administration, the Cuban missile 
crisis, Soviet estimates, and spy satellites. All historians will hope that 
these documents will be followed by many more. 

It is also to be hoped that Getting To Know the President will set a 
precedent for intelligence agencies in other countries. Until similar vol¬ 
umes are available on the briefing of, among others, British prime minis¬ 
ters, German chancellors, French and Russian presidents, and leading 
Asian statesmen, the use made of intelligence by world leaders will con¬ 
tinue to be a major gap in our understanding of both modern government 
and international relations. 


Christopher Andrew 
Corpus Christi College 
Cambridge 


xi 




Preface 


This volume was produced while I served a one-year assignment 
with the CIA’s Center for the Study of Intelligence. I am grateful to the 
Agency for that opportunity. The resulting study, needless to say, is my 
work alone; the opinions offered are not those of the Central Intelligence 
Agency nor the US Government. 

To the maximum extent feasible, contemporaneous written records 
have been used to construct the account of developments presented. For 
the earlier presidential transitions, it has proved possible to declassify all 
relevant documents. Among the numerous individuals who helped search 
for source materials, a few were especially helpful and deserve special 
thanks: CIA officers Janet Platt, Becky Rant, Emma Sullivan, and 
Michael Warner; Andrea Mehrer at the Library of Congress; and Dwight 
D. Eisenhower Library archivist David Haight. 

Interviews with former presidents, CIA directors, and numerous oth¬ 
ers involved in the nine presidential transitions provided invaluable addi¬ 
tional material with which to flesh out the sparse written record. I deeply 
appreciate the honor and time granted me by Presidents George Bush, 
Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, and Gerald Ford in agreeing to be inter¬ 
viewed. Similarly, I am grateful to the CIA directors who were most 
involved in the transitions—Robert Gates, Stansfield Turner, William 
Colby, and Richard Helms—for sharing their recollections. Former 
Agency officer Meredith Davidson provided invaluable assistance in 
reconstructing the events of the early 1950s. 

CIA protects carefully the confidentiality of comments made to its 
officers by serving presidents, and I have continued that tradition in this 
account. Readers will find neither exposes of our presidents’ private 
moments nor specific descriptions of what they said during briefing ses¬ 
sions, especially regarding sensitive policy issues of continuing relevance 
and importance. Similarly, it would not be appropriate to use this volume 
to offer judgments about how well the various presidents used the intelli¬ 
gence they were provided. 1 Nevertheless, I have been able to recount in 


1 In the author’s judgment, the most comprehensive and objective account of how presidents have 
used intelligence throughout their terms of office is Christopher Andrew’s For the President's 
Eyes Only ( London: Harper Collins, 1995). 



unclassified form the circumstances under which the Agency established 
its relationships with successive presidents and to discuss, in general 
terms, the subjects about which they were briefed. None of those inter¬ 
viewed showed any reservation in speaking about the relationship 
between the President and the CIA during the period of their personal 
involvement. 

I thank David Peterson, Richard Kovar, and Judith Van Roy for their 
editorial assistance and, most of all, Harriet Malone for her superb work 
in producing countless drafts of this study. 


John L. Helgerson 



Introduction 


It was President Harry Truman, in whose administration the Central 
Intelligence Agency was created, who instituted the custom of providing 
candidates for the Presidency with confidential briefings on foreign devel¬ 
opments. In 1952 he authorized the CIA to brief Gen. Dwight Eisenhower 
and Governor Adlai Stevenson so that the successful candidate would be 
as well informed as possible on the world situation when he took office. 
The briefings would also position the CIA to develop a close working 
relationship with the new president and his advisers. These two objectives 
have guided the Agency’s efforts during presidential transition periods 
ever since. 

Thus it was, after Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton won the 1992 
election, that the Central Intelligence Agency moved quickly to establish 
a presence in Little Rock to provide intelligence support to the new Presi¬ 
dent-elect. As CIA’s Deputy Director for Intelligence, I was sent to meet 
with the Governor and his staff to describe the materials the Agency pro¬ 
posed to make available and to elicit the Governor’s agreement to receive 
regular briefings from the CIA. Events unfolded in such a way that I 
became the head of a team that spent most of the period from November 
1992 through January 1993 in Little Rock providing daily intelligence 
updates to the President-elect. 

In keeping with President Truman’s long-ago initiative, the Agency 
wanted to help the new President-elect prepare for his foreign policy 
responsibilities and acquaint him and his staff with CIA’s capabilities for 
collecting, analyzing, and delivering intelligence that would be vital to 
them when they took office. As we made arrangements for briefing Gov¬ 
ernor Clinton, we attempted to learn as much as possible from the 
Agency’s experience in previous transition periods. What we discovered 
was that the CIA had provided pre-inaugural intelligence support to all 
eight presidents elected since the Agency was founded, but had no sys¬ 
tematic records of those efforts. There was no body of organized informa¬ 
tion to indicate what had worked before and what had not. Such records 
and memories as we did have, however, made clear that we needed to 


1 




Author John Helgerson reviews materials for his briefing of Governor Bill Clinton at 
the Arkansas Governors mansion. Helgerson was CIA’s Deputy Director for Intelli¬ 
gence at the time. 


make decisions quickly on how to proceed in a number of areas that 
would have an important bearing on whether we met our two primary 
goals. 

The key variables that seem to determine whether the Agency is suc¬ 
cessful in serving a new president fall into four general categories. The 
first of these relates to the level and type of person or persons the Agency 
puts forward to represent it. In some transitions the Director of Central 
Intelligence (DCI) has been personally and extensively involved, in others 
the DCI took no active role. Sometimes the Agency has fielded very 
senior officers as its briefers, but in other instances relied on much more 
junior representatives. When senior officers do the briefings they gener¬ 
ally give the Agency’s product and approach greater credibility and 
access, but their selection also increases the likelihood that the exercise 
will be seen as political. 

A second category of key variables concerns other political consider¬ 
ations to which the Agency must be sensitive to ensure that the Intelli¬ 
gence Community and a new president come to work together well. 
Foremost among these is the background of the president-elect himself. 


2 









particularly as it relates to his familiarity with the CIA and its products. It 
is quite a different matter, for example, to establish a relationship with an 
individual who has moved up from the vice presidency in the way that 
Presidents Gerald Ford and George Bush did, as contrasted with individu¬ 
als who have come to the position with no Washington experience in the 
manner of Presidents Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton. Similarly, the 
Agency’s experience has varied significantly depending on whether or not 
the new president has come from the same political party as his predeces¬ 
sor. 

The DCI’s own political or career ambitions have sometimes raised 
delicate political problems. It is not unlikely, for example, that during a 
transition period the interests of the DCI would not correspond with those 
of the CIA as an institution. A most important political variable is the atti¬ 
tudes of the outgoing president and the national security adviser. Their 
support for the Agency’s efforts to establish an early and effective rela¬ 
tionship with a new administration facilitates matters immensely. 

The third group of key variables concerns logistic arrangements for 
the briefings. Should briefings be given prior to the election to both, or 
even multiple, candidates? Alternatively, should they be postponed until 
after the vote and provided exclusively to the single president-elect during 
the transition? How many briefings should be given and with what fre¬ 
quency? Experience shows that it matters, too, where the briefings are 
given and whether only the candidate is briefed or staff assistants are 
included as well. 

Finally, concerning the substance of the information provided, there 
have been considerable variations in the amount and the type of material 
made available. All candidates in recent years have valued receiving the 
President's Daily Brief (PDB), the CIA intelligence summary created 
exclusively for the President. Some have wanted to receive additional, 
supplementary intelligence publications during the campaign and the tran¬ 
sition period. A few have wanted oral briefings by a number of substan¬ 
tive experts as opposed to hearing from a single Agency briefer each day; 
others have found multiple briefers confusing or overwhelming. 

An important issue to be faced by the Agency during each transition 
concerns how much information derived from sensitive human sources 
and technical collection efforts and regarding covert action programs 
should be included in the material given a president-elect, and when. Pres¬ 
idents in office are always informed of such programs, and careful atten¬ 
tion is given to the timing, level of detail, and content of the presentation. 
And finally, concerning the substance of the support provided, there have 
been dramatic variations in the amount of tailored assistance the Agency 
has provided presidents-elect to prepare them for pre-inaugural planning 
and policy deliberations, speeches and press conferences, and, in particu¬ 
lar, their meetings and communications with foreign statesmen. 


3 



Given the importance of these variables in determining whether the 
CIA will come to work well with a new president during the transition 
period and beyond, it seemed desirable for the Agency’s own purposes to 
create a record of what we have done in the past, noting what has worked 
and what has not. Even a cursory examination of the Agency’s experience 
over the past 40 years reveals that it is often not intuitively obvious or 
self-evident what approaches will translate into success. Not infrequently, 
moreover, certain actions that have assisted us in realizing one of our 
goals have undermined achievement of the other. 

I have also been prompted to pursue this undertaking by observing 
firsthand the importance of the transition period in informing and prepar¬ 
ing an incoming president. I was struck to discover during the 1992-93 
transition that the Central Intelligence Agency is virtually alone (with the 
obvious and distinguished exception of the Secret Service) in providing 
day-to-day, on-site, direct support to the president-elect during this critical 
period. This puts a responsibility on the Agency not only to represent the 
Intelligence Community as a whole but, to the extent feasible, also to 
make available to the president-elect materials from other executive 
departments handling national security and foreign policy matters, includ¬ 
ing the National Security Council, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the 
Departments of Defense, State, and Treasury. 

In preparing this study I have been pleased to discover, or confirm, 
that certain of the intelligence briefings provided to incoming presidents 
have turned out to be of genuine and lasting historical importance in their 
own right. To use one example, the DCI and the Deputy Director for Plans 
(Operations) provided President-elect Kennedy information on the 
Agency’s plans for what would become the Bay of Pigs operation in 
Cuba. This occurred at a meeting with only the three of them present. A 
great deal of what has subsequently been written by others about what 
Kennedy was told, when he was told it, and what he said in response, is 
substantially wrong. I hope this account can clarify the circumstances of 
this and other important briefings provided to presidents over the years. 

Finally, because the CIA’s role during transitions is unique, the 
Agency seems to me to have an obligation to record what it has done and 
to make its account as widely available as possible. Perhaps this material 
will be of use not only to Agency officers charged with meeting our brief¬ 
ing responsibilities in the future, but also to others interested in CIA’s con¬ 
tributions during these important chapters of our national history. 


4 



Chapter 1 


Briefing Governor Clinton in Little Rock 


During the presidential campaign of 1992, President Bush continued 
to receive intelligence briefings on a regular basis just as he had for the 
previous 12 years. When he was on the road campaigning he was sent the 
President's Daily Brief { PDB), which informed him each morning of new 
developments warranting his attention and provided him in-depth analysis 
of sensitive international situations. When he was in Washington, the 
President would read the PDB with the Agency’s briefing officer present 
so that he could hear of any late updates, review and discuss supplemen¬ 
tary materials, and ask for new or follow-up information. 

Fortunately, in light of the election outcome, President Bush’s back¬ 
ground had made him uniquely mindful of the value of providing intelli¬ 
gence briefings to the challenger as well. He had been Director of Central 
Intelligence (DCI) in 1976, and in that capacity had personally provided 
briefings to Governor Jimmy Carter at his home in Georgia. Bush played a 
major role in arranging briefings for Governor Ronald Reagan in 1980, 
and as Vice President he received briefings during the transition to his 
own presidency in 1988. There was no doubt that as President he would 
approve briefings for Governor Bill Clinton, continuing uninterrupted the 
practice set in motion by President Truman forty years before. 


The DCI Visits Little Rock 

Soon after the Democratic convention in 1992, National Security 
Adviser Brent Scowcroft contacted Washington attorney Samuel Berger 
to offer intelligence briefings to Governor Clinton. At that time, Berger, 
who subsequently became Deputy National Security Adviser, was serving 
as a primary adviser to Governor Clinton on foreign policy matters. 
Scowcroft and Berger agreed that, as a first step, DCI Robert Gates would 
travel to Little Rock and provide a worldwide intelligence briefing. 


5 



In preparation for his meeting with the DCI, the candidate’s staff had 
prepared extensive reading materials for his review. On the appointed day, 
the Governor met over lunch with his running mate, Senator Albert Gore, 
and with the outgoing chairmen of the two Congressional intelligence 
committees, Senator David Boren and Representative David McCurdy, 
who were to participate in the briefing session. 

The DCI also had spent considerable time preparing, mindful of the 
Governor’s lack of familiarity and experience with the Intelligence Commu¬ 
nity and its products.' Knowing that presidential campaigns often kept candi¬ 
dates too busy for regular briefings. Gates also wanted to make the most of 
what might be the Agency’s only opportunity to deal directly with the candi¬ 
date before the election. 

Governor Clinton was a gracious host when the DCI began his brief¬ 
ing in Little Rock on the afternoon of 4 September, and the session pro¬ 
ceeded in a relaxed atmosphere. The substantive issues on which the DCI 
focused included the turmoil in Russia, conflict in the former Yugoslavia, 
and developments in Iraq, North Korea, China, and Iran. He stressed the 
problem of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. There was some 
discussion of foreign economic espionage directed against the United 
States and relatively brief treatment of a half-dozen Third World issues 
ranging from hunger in Africa to prospects for Cambodia. 

The Governor listened attentively and asked probing questions, pri¬ 
marily on proliferation, Iraq, and the situations in Bosnia and Russia. On 
nonsubstantive matters, which were discussed only briefly, the DCI was 
heartened when Governor Clinton expressed his support for a strong and 
capable US intelligence service. Responding to an allusion by the DCI to 
intelligence budget stringencies, Governor Clinton turned to Boren and 
McCurdy and joked, “Is this your doing?” 

The others were actively involved as well. Senator Gore, in particu¬ 
lar, had a number of questions, and Boren and McCurdy drew on their 
experiences to highlight various aspects of the intelligence business. 

Following that meeting, no further briefings were provided to Gover¬ 
nor Clinton until after the election on 3 November. This was not surpris¬ 
ing; experience with other candidates in recent years had shown that such 
briefings have been difficult to arrange or politically awkward during the 
period of the heaviest campaigning and presidential debates. 


1 Robert Gates, interview by the author, McLean, Virginia, 12 April 1993. Subsequent references 
to the Gates briefing come from this interview. 


6 



Establishing a “Permanent” Presence 

Like other Americans, Agency officials followed the campaign and 
watched the polls carefully, but they took no steps to establish a CIA pres¬ 
ence in Little Rock until after the election had been decided. This left 
senior managers somewhat anxious about whether a field facility could be 
set up in time to provide the highest quality intelligence materials to the 
President-elect should he want them immediately. As it turned out, this 
was not a problem; it was a full week before the confusion of the postelec¬ 
tion period dissipated and Agency officers could discuss the practical 
aspects of intelligence briefings with the President-elect’s team. In the 
interim, the DCI reconfirmed President Bush’s approval for the establish¬ 
ment of an Agency outpost in Arkansas. 

A team drawn from CIA’s Offices of Communications, Security, Cur¬ 
rent Production and Analytic Support (CPAS), and Logistics discreetly 
established an Agency office in Little Rock in the days following the elec¬ 
tion. The DCI asked the author, as the Agency’s Deputy Director for Intel¬ 
ligence, to head the team and to elicit from Governor Clinton and his staff 
agreement that he should receive daily intelligence briefings from CIA. 
Although this was accomplished smoothly, at the time I had more than a 
few apprehensions. We were aware that staff members in some previous 
transitions, including at least a couple at very senior levels, had worked 
vigorously to thwart undertakings such as we were about to propose. 

On 11 November, I met with Berger and Nancy Soderberg of Gover¬ 
nor Clinton’s staff to make our pitch. The meeting was held in downtown 
Little Rock in a hastily commandeered office in the building into which 
the transition team was moving that very day. Berger and Soderberg could 
not have been more receptive. They were not familiar with the Intelli¬ 
gence Community or its range of products but were interested in ascer¬ 
taining what kinds of support could be provided Governor Clinton and 
key staffers in Little Rock and Washington. 

We described the functions of the various agencies and the products 
normally provided to the President. Our discussion naturally focused on 
the PDB, including an explanation of how the President received it from 
an Agency briefer each day and how the Agency responded to follow-up 
questions. We recommended that the Agency also provide the Governor a 
daily Supplement to the PDB, inasmuch as the regular publication would 
still reflect the interests of President Bush and its focus would not neces¬ 
sarily correspond with the needs of Governor Clinton. 

Berger and Soderberg were shown copies of that day’s PDB and a 
proposed supplemental current intelligence publication. We also showed 
them the National Intelligence Daily (NID) and other selected materials, 
noting that the publications they had before them had been printed earlier 
that morning in a hotel room in Little Rock. They were clearly impressed 


7 



The PDB Briefing Process 

During the Bush and Clinton presidencies, the Agency's practice 
has been to print the PDB in the early morning hours and to have 
our briefers present it personally to presidentially designated recip¬ 
ients at the opening of business. Having the briefer present when the 
PDB is read allows Agency officers to answer a large proportion of 
follow-up questions on the spot . More involved questions and 
requests for additional information are brought back to analysts at 
Headquarters, with written or oral answers provided the following 
day. This system provides the Agency a firsthand and timely method 
of keeping abreast of policymakers' interests and a reliable means 
of protecting the security of the PDB. 


with the quality of the books; the installation in Little Rock of secure 
communications equipment for receiving high-quality color computer 
graphics from CIA Headquarters proved well worth the effort. 

Berger undertook to discuss the issues related to intelligence brief¬ 
ings with Governor Clinton and promised to get back to us promptly. In 
fact, the next day Soderberg called our advance command post to indicate 
that Governor Clinton did indeed want to receive the PDB and a briefer, at 
least for a trial period, to see what kinds of information it contained and 
what his schedule permitted. 

On 13 November, 10 days following the election, we had our first 
session with Governor Clinton in the book-lined study of the Governor’s 
Mansion. Senator Gore was at the Mansion for other meetings and joined 
us. Our introductory exchange was a bit awkward as we all fumbled 
around deciding where best to sit to go over the materials we had brought. 
We settled on a large round table in the corner of the study. After offering 
a brief but friendly welcome, our two new customers immediately read 
every word of that day’s PDB, obviously intrigued to see what it con¬ 
tained. 

Much of our discussion concerned procedures related to the PDB. 
The President-elect wanted to be sure he could receive briefings whenever 
they could be fitted into his schedule. We assured him that he could but 
suggested a fixed time, preferably an early morning session, as the most 
likely to be satisfactory on an ongoing basis. We informed the Governor 
that the PDB in the recent past had been provided also to the Vice Presi¬ 
dent, the National Security Adviser and his Deputy, the Chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the White House Chief of Staff, and the Secretaries 
of State and Defense, but that in the future the distribution list would be 


8 




his to control. Governor Clinton replied that he wanted Senator Gore to 
begin receiving the PDB immediately and asked that we provide it to 
other Cabinet-level recipients once they were named, assuming this was 
agreeable to President Bush. I took the opportunity to wonder aloud 
whether it would not make sense to provide the PDB also to the Secretary 
of the Treasury, given the steadily growing importance of economic 
issues. The President-elect thought for only a moment, declared this to be 
a very good idea and ordered that immediately after the inauguration we 
should begin regular briefings of the Secretary of the Treasury as well. 

The Governor was immediately interested in our suggestion that he 
receive a personalized supplement. After some discussion, he indicated he 
would accept in it some material chosen by us to elaborate items dis¬ 
cussed in the main PDB. However, he underscored that he wanted the 
Supplement to focus primarily on specific issues requiring early policy 
action. He opined off the cuff that his list of topics would surely include 
proliferation issues, Haiti, Bosnia, and Somalia. Senator Gore suggested 
that we include items on global environmental issues. 

Berger was charged with drawing up a list of topics to be covered in 
the Supplement. In fact, such a list proved unnecessary, because the staff 
quickly observed that the issues the Governor had identified received vir¬ 
tually daily treatment in the regular PDB. Occasionally, in the weeks to 
come, the staff was to request that a specific topic be treated in the Sup¬ 
plement, and we readily complied. 

The discussion of our preparing materials directly related to policy 
decisions prompted me to volunteer at the first meeting that CIA saw its 
proper role as providing intelligence reports and analysis, including 
exploration of the likely ramifications for the United States of pursuing 
given courses of action. Experience had shown, however, that we should 
not be in the business of formulating or advocating policy options. In the 
back of my mind were memories of the policy buzz saws—particularly 
regarding Latin America and the Persian Gulf—the Agency had walked 
into during the 1980s. To our relief, Governor Clinton and Senator Gore 
both understood immediately and agreed with our understanding of the 
proper role of intelligence. At no time were we to have any problem 
avoiding policy entanglements. 

On the substantive side, both Governor Clinton and Senator Gore 
had comments on many of the items in the PDB that first day. Various 
pieces prompted stories of world leaders they had met and countries they 
had visited. Like all of our readers, they found the graphics—the maps, 
charts, and imagery—to be especially useful. The fact that the session 
went on for approximately an hour was flattering but prompted well- 
founded fears on our side that our chief problem in Little Rock would be 
scheduling our briefings. It was a continuing challenge to fit the intelli¬ 
gence briefings into the Governor’s always-hectic schedule. 


9 



At this session Governor Clinton was again a gracious host, as he had 
been when the DCI visited, welcoming us and inquiring about our 
arrangements in Little Rock. On learning that the Agency had set up its 
operation in a modest motel near the airport, the Governor expressed sur¬ 
prise. I half-jokingly responded that we thought it important to impress a 
new president with our frugality given CIA’s limited budget. He took this 
in good humor, and after laughing appreciatively sat back and said, “Well, 
I am impressed.” 

Following the session with the Governor, we had an opportunity to 
talk with Mrs. Clinton as we were departing the Mansion. When she 
remarked that she was aware of substantial adjustments being made at 
CIA to deal with the changing international situation, we volunteered that 
the Agency occasionally had provided support to her predecessors and 
would be pleased to provide her also with written material and/or brief¬ 
ings to prepare for foreign trips or visitors. She expressed gratitude for the 
offer and indicated she would follow up through the National Security 
Adviser. 


Substance of Discussions 

The daily intelligence briefings continued almost without interrup¬ 
tion from 13 November to 16 January 1993, when both the Governor and 
the briefing process relocated to Washington. Throughout that period, we 
made a point to provide Governor Clinton exactly the same material that 
was being shown to President Bush in Washington. This included, in addi¬ 
tion to the PDB itself, drafts of National Intelligence Estimates and 
selected raw intelligence traffic—including Directorate of Operations 
reports, State Department cables, and NSA traffic. However, it quickly 
became apparent that the Governor’s primary interest was in studying the 
PDB. 

Three subjects were addressed with great frequency in the PDB. First 
among these was Russia. At the time, the United States and Russia were 
still putting the finishing touches on the START II agreement. Debate was 
under way in the press and the Congress about how much additional aid 
the United States should provide Russia, and there was much discussion 
of a possible Russian-American summit, possibly one that would include 
President-elect Clinton. As background to these issues, there were the 
worrisome daily developments in Moscow as President Yel’tsin and the 
Russian Congress fought over their conflicting visions of Russia’s politi¬ 
cal and economic future. Coverage of these subjects resulted in the publi¬ 
cation of more than 50 PDB articles on Russia that the Governor studied 
during the transition period. 


10 



The other two topics that received extensive treatment were Somalia 
and Yugoslavia. Our policy-level readers had a great appetite for under¬ 
standing events on the ground in Somalia while discussions proceeded in 
the Executive Branch, the press, and the Congress about whether and how 
the United States should become involved. Governor Clinton obviously 
knew that he would inherit the Somalia problem whether or not President 
Bush introduced US forces. Similarly, there were numerous intelligence 
items reporting on the situation in the former Yugoslavia, and here, too, 
the Governor read with special care, aware that he would be called on to 
make decisions concerning the level of any US involvement in the conflict 
there. Governor Clinton seemed throughout to value our efforts to keep 
him abreast of these developments, and he came to them already well 
informed. These were two foreign policy problems he had raised in the 
campaign; he had obviously done his homework, particularly regarding 
the policy aspects of each. 

The next tier of items in terms of the frequency with which they were 
addressed in the PDB included Iraq, GATT talks in Europe, Haiti, and the 
Israel-Lebanon situation. During this period, Iraq was relatively calm, 
although Washington and Baghdad were still jockeying over what was 
acceptable behavior in terms of the placement of Iraqi air defense weap¬ 
ons and US overflights. This testing continued throughout the period, and 
we all were mindful that Iraq’s actions might be designed in part to elicit 
some statement or sign of the attitudes of the incoming Clinton adminis¬ 
tration. 

Concerning Europe, the United States was in the process of negotiat¬ 
ing certain intractable agricultural issues with the European Community 
(EC)—-particularly France. This discussion was all but certain to be 
incomplete at inauguration time. In Haiti, a ragtag fleet of new boats was 
being built as Haitians prepared to flee their country in the belief the new 
US President would be more welcoming than the outgoing Bush adminis¬ 
tration. And in the Middle East, Israeli, Palestinian, and Lebanese leaders 
were conducting an angry war of words over the fate of the Palestinian 
expellees then camped on the Lebanese border. 

Of these second-tier problems, Governor Clinton clearly was most 
interested in Haiti. It, too, had been among the foreign policy issues he 
had highlighted during the campaign. The Iraqi, European, and Israeli 
issues all were of interest but were fundamentally different in the sense 
that Governor Clinton obviously did not believe they would require fun¬ 
damental policy decisions immediately. 

A few items in the PDB led to interesting discussions about the rela¬ 
tionship between intelligence reporting and appropriate follow-up in the 
policymaking and law enforcement communities. Sometimes this 
included discussion of actions that might be taken by the President him¬ 
self. When he read one piece on the possible transfer of missiles between 


11 



two countries, for example, the Governor initiated a discussion about 
actions a president might take in response to such a report. Such occasions 
permitted us to explain the mechanisms through which the acquisition of 
intelligence information results in concrete operational accomplishments 
in the areas of proliferation, narcotics, or other sanctions enforcement. 

Unlike the situation in some previous presidential transitions, there 
was in 1992 a very close congruence between the subject matter presented 
in the intelligence reporting and the international developments receiving 
the most attention in the US press. With minor variations, the same issues 
received the most prominence during the campaign and, to a lesser extent, 
in the presidential debates. 

In fact, during the presidential debates of 1992 there was very little 
focus on international events. The first debate, held in St. Louis on 
11 October, had included some discussion of three high-priority issues: 
Bosnia, Iraq, and Somalia. The Governor’s interest obviously continued at 
a high level as these subjects were discussed subsequently in the intelli¬ 
gence reporting. There were, however, certain other issues raised in the St. 
Louis debate that turned out to receive almost no coverage and were of lit¬ 
tle day-to-day interest, including the international politics surrounding the 
question of US defense commitments and troop levels in Western Europe 
and the next steps in arms control. 

The subsequent two presidential debates, held in Richmond on 
15 October and in East Lansing on 19 October, included almost no discus¬ 
sion of foreign affairs. There were some exchanges on global economic 
issues and the new world order, including the opening of foreign markets 
to US exports. In East Lansing there was a brief exchange on Iraq. These 
discussions, however, concerned overall policy direction and did not 
translate into concrete interest on the Governor’s part in follow-up intelli¬ 
gence reporting. 

To our pleasure, and occasionally to our embarrassment, Governor 
Clinton read the PDB carefully no matter what might be next on his 
schedule. We frequently made suggestions that he might want to concen¬ 
trate on certain items and skip others if he were in a hurry, but he seldom 
accepted these invitations. On one memorable day the hurried Governor 
was busy putting on his necktie and drinking a Diet Coke when we met 
for our session. He said he would not have time to read the book and 
asked that I simply tell him what was important. I gave him two-sentence 
summaries of a half-dozen items and one longer article in the PDB. When 
I finished this staccato account I expected the Governor to depart, but he 
said, “Well, that sounds interesting,” seized the book, and sat down and 
read the whole thing. He had tied his necktie. 

Certain aspects of the PDB grabbed the attention of Governor Clin¬ 
ton as they had captured the attention of previous readers over the years. 
As mentioned earlier, chief among these were the graphics, which he 


12 



always looked at first. Also, he was obviously interested in the Weekly 
Leadership Notes, a feature of the PDB that describes briefly what the 
President’s counterparts around the world will be doing during the coming 
week. Finally, like his predecessors, Governor Clinton reacted well (chari¬ 
tably, actually) to our occasional attempts at humor; he, too, suggested 
that more humor would be welcome. 

Not everything worked. One item that President Bush had found use¬ 
ful, for example, had been a looseleaf notebook that the Agency had 
assembled containing page-size maps of virtually every place of interest 
in the world. President Bush would regularly open his desk drawer, pull 
out this collection of maps and refer to it while reading or discussing the 
PDB. In one of our early sessions with Governor Clinton, we presented 
such a map notebook to him. He received it with thanks, but that was the 
last we ever saw or heard of it. 

Similarly, we were a bit discouraged, although not altogether sur¬ 
prised, to find that the Supplement was only a limited success. I thought 
analysts in the Agency did a fine job of preparing perceptive background 
articles pegged to issues treated briefly in the PDB and in providing in- 
depth material on issues we knew to be high on the Clinton agenda. The 
first of the Supplements, for example, included articles on reform in Rus¬ 
sia, the economic outlook for East Asia, the crisis in Angola, and Bosnian 
Serb flight activity. The second Supplement addressed the politically 
charged issue of detention camps in Bosnia, included biographic material 
on the three presidential candidates in South Korea, and discussed the 
background on the fighting in Lebanon. Such material was made available 
to the Governor for a period of days, but it was clear that while he was 
interested in principle, he simply did not have time to go through this 
material unless it was related to a high-priority issue that had to be 
addressed immediately. 

When it became clear that the Supplement was not being read and we 
found ourselves holding it over from one day to the next, we experi¬ 
mented with a much reduced version in which we provided a single page 
of material on only one or two background issues. These, too, proved of 
limited utility. 

What did turn out to be of use was an art form created in Little Rock 
by John McLaughlin, CIA’s Director of Slavic and Eurasian Analysis, 
who spelled me for two-week periods in delivering the briefings. 
McLaughlin was in Little Rock during a period when the Governor’s 
schedule forced postponement of several briefings until noon or even 
afternoon. By this time, the wheel of international events had turned 
enough that the morning PDB was lagging behind press reports that were 
by then available to us and the Governor. As a result, McLaughlin began 
typing up one-page summaries of developments since the PDB was pub¬ 
lished, and we found that these were of interest to Governor Clinton. His 


13 




John McLaughlin and President-elect Clinton relax after one of the daily briefings 
presented during the pre-inaugural period. McLaughlin and the author rotated the 
duty of providing the briefings in Little Rock. 


interest derived from the fact that he was using the briefing process as a 
useful supplement in preparing for his frequent press conferences. When¬ 
ever the PDB briefing was delayed well into the day, we prepared these 
updates and used them instead of the formal Supplement, which was grad¬ 
ually phased out. 

Unlike some of his predecessors, Governor Clinton during the transi¬ 
tion did not receive any comprehensive briefings on the organization of 
the Intelligence Community or on sensitive collection programs involving 
human assets or technical collection techniques. Neither did he receive a 
comprehensive briefing on covert action programs before the inaugura¬ 
tion. As a result, we found ourselves during the PDB briefings occasion¬ 
ally providing explanations of Intelligence Community programs that 
grew naturally out of the substantive issues discussed in the PDB. This 
gave us, for example, opportunities to brief on US imaging systems and to 
describe NSA and its product. On a couple of occasions we provided brief 
accounts of specific covert action programs, an awareness of which was 
essential to make sense of the day’s PDB. 


14 












In retrospect, this probably was a good way to introduce a new presi¬ 
dent to sensitive covert action and collection programs; that is, tying the 
fact of a program to its intelligence payoff. Earlier experience had shown 
that comprehensive briefings on these programs sometimes were over¬ 
whelming and did not stick with the recipient. Obviously, after inaugura¬ 
tion, any president should still receive a general overview briefing from 
the DCI and/or the Deputy Director for Operations. In expressing his 
views on this subject, former President Bush was decidedly of the opinion 
that a president-elect needed to be briefed on any sensitive programs that 
had the potential to blow up on him, but otherwise should be spared the 
details until in office. 2 


Other Opportunities To Help 

To underscore the unique relationship between the United States and 
Mexico, several recent presidents-elect have made a point of meeting with 
the President of Mexico during the transition period before holding meet¬ 
ings with any other foreign leader. Governor Clinton was no exception 
and scheduled a meeting with President Carlos Salinas in Austin, Texas, 
on 8 January 1993. We had assumed such a session would occur and had 
prepared a fair amount of material addressing economic issues—espe¬ 
cially the North American Free Trade Agreement—as well as Mexico’s 
political situation and bilateral narcotics cooperation. As it turned out, the 
Governor’s own staff had prepared him extremely well on the NAFTA, so 
our material on that subject was largely unneeded. 

The day or two before Governor Clinton’s departure for Texas to see 
President Salinas proved to be most hectic. Fearing this, we had worked 
with his staff to prepare a package of one-page pieces that supplemented 
the briefing books he had already received. In the discussion in the Man¬ 
sion before departure on 8 January it was clear that he had read the 
Agency’s material carefully. This included specifically the material on the 
narcotics problem, which obviously was high on the Governor’s agenda. 

The biographies the Agency had prepared of Mexican leaders with 
whom the Governor would be meeting were also of high interest. We have 
found in recent years that high-level policymakers have welcomed short 
videos on foreign leaders. In addition to passing along factual informa¬ 
tion, the videos can effectively show speaking style, body language, emo¬ 
tional intensity, and so on. The Agency had produced a video on President 


2 George Bush, interview by the author, Kennebunkport, Maine, 6 May 1993. Subsequent refer¬ 
ences to Bush’s comments come from this interview. 


15 



Salinas, and the day before the departure for Texas we had an opportunity 
to show it to Senator Gore, who in turn recommended it enthusiastically to 
Governor Clinton. 

Having no confidence we would find an opportunity for Governor 
Clinton to watch this video in traditional VCR format, we had acquired a 
minivideo machine, a Sony Watchman, and created a small tape version. 
Time ran out in our briefing, so Governor Clinton and his traveling com¬ 
panions took the video machine with them so that he could watch it en 
route to Austin. Berger jokingly remarked that he had heard each new 
administration receives a free video machine from the CIA. It was 
returned the next day. 

The meeting with President Salinas gave us a welcome opportunity 
to demonstrate how the Agency can be useful in preparing a president for 
meetings with foreign leaders. To our satisfaction, when we saw Governor 
Clinton the next day following his return from Texas, he volunteered that 
he had found President Salinas and the Mexican approach at the meeting 
to be “exactly as you had predicted.” 

We also provided material for use during the many telephone calls 
the President-elect made to world leaders. The first such instance involved 
Korean President Roh Tae Woo whom, by coincidence, Governor Clinton 
was to telephone the first day we saw him in Little Rock. Agency officers 
provided similar information to assist the Governor in making contact 
with perhaps a dozen other world leaders as well. 

The most interesting conversation for which we were able to support 
Governor Clinton was the one he had with President Boris YePtsin on 
4 January 1993. Before the call, the Governor’s aides and we had dis¬ 
cussed with him what YePtsin presumably wanted from him and the 
points he was likely to raise during the call. In fact, there were no sur¬ 
prises. The items discussed, as were later reported to the press, included 
START II and its ratification, Ukrainian support for the treaty, issues of 
economic reform in Russia, cooperation between the United States and 
Russia on Bosnia, and the timing of a future meeting between Presidents 
YePtsin and Clinton. 

Although it is hardly satisfying to hear only one side of a conversa¬ 
tion, particularly one that is conducted through an interpreter, it appeared 
to be helpful that we were able to sit in the room with the President-elect 
during his discussion with YePtsin. Following that fairly lengthy conver¬ 
sation we were able immediately to go over some of the points YePtsin 
had made. Our discussion served, I believe, to clarify certain of the inher¬ 
ently ambiguous points that had come up. In fact, during that immediate 
follow-on session and over the next two days, we continued to furnish 
Agency materials that provided context to the points YePtsin had made, 
especially those related to arms control issues. 


16 



McLaughlin had the sad task of helping Governor Clinton with some 
other telephone calls as well. These were the ones he made to the families 
of US personnel who were casualties in Somalia. McLaughlin acquired 
the facts needed to place the calls and, at the Governor’s request, coor¬ 
dinated with the White House to be sure that calls from the President-elect 
did not interfere in any way with calls being made by President Bush. 

We had been asked to provide substantive and logistic support of a 
different nature at an earlier point when the Vice Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff had visited Little Rock. On 4 December, Adm. David Jere¬ 
miah, accompanied by Assistant Secretary of State for Political/Military 
Affairs Robert Gallucci, visited Little Rock to explain the plan for US 
involvement in Somalia. This visit had been expected but was firmly 
scheduled only at the last minute. The afternoon before, the White House, 
through the DCI, had contacted us requesting that the CIA team in Little 
Rock make the supporting arrangements for Admiral Jeremiah’s visit. 

The visit went very well, although with much less elaborate logistic 
support than is usually provided for a flag-rank officer. Agency personnel 
from the Office of Communications and the Office of Security handled all 
the arrangements and served as escort officers. They rented a van to trans¬ 
port the expected large number of briefing boards, cleared the military 
team with the Secret Service, and transferred the Admiral and his support¬ 
ing staff to the Governor’s Mansion and back to the airport. Once at the 
Mansion, they introduced Admiral Jeremiah and his team to the Clinton 
staff. 

The briefing itself was attended not only by Governor Clinton but 
also by Senator Gore and by Warren Christopher, who had not yet been 
designated Secretary of State. Other Clinton aides were also present. Inas¬ 
much as we had spent almost a month at that point briefing Governor 
Clinton daily on the situation on the ground in Somalia—and as I had just 
finished the morning PDB update—Dave Jeremiah devoted relatively lit¬ 
tle time to describing the current situation and turned instead to a discus¬ 
sion of planned US actions. 

As always, Jeremiah provided an informal and to-the-point briefing, 
and Governor Clinton and the others obviously appreciated it. I was 
relieved to have it occur, because a certain amount of frustration was 
building among the Clinton staff, who sensibly wanted to know what 
Somalia operation they would inherit. Gallucci from State clarified issues 
related to the policy side of the US involvement. Knowing he would 
assume responsibility for an ongoing project. Governor Clinton asked 
about the expected duration of the operation, the conditions under which 
US forces would be withdrawn, and where things stood regarding the for¬ 
mation of a UN-controlled follow-on force that would relieve the US 


17 



units. Governor Clinton’s own predictions about how long US forces 
would be required to stay in Somalia ultimately proved to be right on the 
mark. 

Later in December, McLaughlin and the rest of the group then in Lit¬ 
tle Rock had a full and exciting day when Governor Clinton named his 
national security team. While McLaughlin was waiting for his late-mom- 
ing appointment on 22 December, the National Security appointees 
entered the Mansion’s reception area. This gave McLaughlin and the Gov¬ 
ernor’s aides an opportunity to caucus with the appointees in an informal 
roundtable discussion of the latest events in Serbia, Russia, and the Mid¬ 
dle East in preparation for the day’s press conference. 

During the press conference, the appointments of Warren Christo¬ 
pher, Les Aspin, Tony Lake, Madeleine Albright, Jim Woolsey, and Sandy 
Berger were announced. Following the press conference, Agency officers 
had a welcome opportunity to meet the DCI-designate, brief him on the 
international situation, and show him quickly around the facility that had 
been established in Little Rock. 

As luck would have it, about the time the personnel announcements 
were made, Little Rock Airport became completely fogged in and none of 
the appointees was able to depart the city as anticipated. The stranded 
group all assembled for dinner that evening with one exception—the DCI- 
designate. Christopher indicated the next day that the group had been curi¬ 
ous about Woolsey’s whereabouts, joking that “those CIA folks” must 
have spirited him away. We dispelled the mystery surrounding the DCI- 
designate’s disappearance. It had been important for him to get to Califor¬ 
nia the next day, so one of our communications officers had rented a car— 
at Woolsey’s expense—and driven him to Dallas so he could catch an 
early morning flight to California. 


Great Support Made It Work 

Immediately after the election, two representatives of the Office of 
Communications had been dispatched to Little Rock to find office space 
for our support operation. They quickly located what turned out to be a 
perfect setup in the Comfort Inn, a modest motel approximately one mile 
from Little Rock Airport. There was an even more modest restaurant, a 
Waffle House, adjacent. The location facilitated the regular turnover of 
personnel and provided convenient access to the Governor’s Mansion, 
which was a five- to ten-minute drive from there. 

From a security point of view it was an ideal arrangement; we were 
able to rent a group of rooms that allowed us to control the space above, 
below and on each side of our command post. The center of our operation 
was an apartment formerly used by the motel manager, who had earlier 


18 



installed a “panic alarm” hooked directly into police headquarters. The 
apartment contained a large living/dining room that we converted into 
office space and two bedrooms, one of which was used as an office for the 
senior briefer and the other as a refuge for the person who caught the 
overnight shift. Finally, the facility had a kitchenette that made it much 
more habitable for all concerned. Coming from Washington, we were 
impressed that the cost of our individual rooms was $38.50 per night. We 
paid twice that for the apartment. The motel staff could not have been 
more supportive or discreet. Initially, they presumed that we were with the 
Secret Service, an impression that we soon corrected. 

Our security officers took pains to get to know the Secret Service 
detail in Little Rock. This was time well spent; its members were eager to 
give us any backup security assistance we might need at the command 
post and were most helpful in facilitating our access to the Governor’s 
Mansion. Their help was all the more necessary when we accompanied 
the Clintons to California and South Carolina. 

At the time we established our operation, the press in Little Rock was 
desperate for news of the President-elect’s every activity. This made us 
apprehensive that press attention to our presence could force our reloca¬ 
tion to secure quarters. As a result, we investigated the possibility of oper¬ 
ating from Little Rock Air Force Base. The Commanding Officer was 
eager to have us locate there and was prepared to offer every assistance. 
Our security and communications officers visited the base and were given 
a tour of the proposed facilities. Secure storage, office space, and commu¬ 
nications were available to us. 

The problem was that the air base was several miles beyond the city 
of North Little Rock on the other side of the Arkansas River; the drive to 
the Governor’s Mansion would have been considerably longer. Moreover, 
although some quarters might have been available, we would not have 
been able to stay nearly as close to our command center. In the motel we 
could simply walk out of one room and into another to receive secure 
calls, faxes, and so forth. With this convenience in mind, we kept the air 
base as a fallback possibility, but we were never forced to use it. 

It was three weeks before the press became aware of, or at least paid 
any attention to, the fact that the CIA was present in Little Rock and was 
providing intelligence briefings to the President-elect. In the early days of 
our operation the Governor’s staff had been happy to follow our sugges¬ 
tion that we simply make no public announcement about our operation. At 
a later stage, however, there was discussion in the press about how Gover¬ 
nor Clinton was preparing to take on the international responsibilities of 
the presidency. At that point, the Governor’s team confirmed publicly that 
he was receiving regular briefings from the Agency and was seeing all 
intelligence material available to President Bush. 


19 



It took a few days for the press to get the story straight. Initial inquir¬ 
ies came from the Los Angeles Times on the first of December. On the sec¬ 
ond, the Arkansas Democrat Gazette made reference to “daily written 
briefings from the Administration and briefings by telephone.” A day 
later, The New York Times came closer, reporting that “the Central Intelli¬ 
gence Agency has set up an office in Little Rock from which to deliver a 
copy of the National Intelligence Daily to Mr. Clinton. Mr. Clinton also 
receives a fifteen-minute oral briefing on security matters every day that 
aides say is the same one that Mr. Bush gets at the White House.” Later, 
on NBC’s morning news program, the Governor’s spokesman, George 
Stephanopoulos, explained that the President-elect was fully informed 
about foreign policy issues because the “CIA briefs him daily.” 

The press kept a vigil on the side street from which all traffic entered 
and exited the Governor’s Mansion and on many occasions filmed our 
comings and goings. Nevertheless, we were not pursued or otherwise 
bothered and were successful throughout in protecting our identities and 
location. Keeping a low profile, however, meant we made little use of the 
bar in the Capital Hotel downtown; it was the gathering place for visiting 
politicos, but was also the hangout for all the reporters. 

We were pleased that the residents of Little Rock not only caused no 
difficulties for us but also had a healthy outside-the-beltway perspective 
on our Agency. On one of the early occasions when I arrived in the city, 
for example, I stepped up to the car rental counter at the airport and was 
provided a useful lesson in humility. The clerk at the counter, while filling 
out the forms, asked, “What firm are you with?” I said it was a govern¬ 
ment rental; I was with CIA. To her quick “What’s that?” I said, “Central 
Intelligence Agency.” Without a flicker of recognition or interest, she 
requested, “Could you spell that, please?” It is good to be reminded that, 
at least in some locales, we are neither as famous nor as infamous as one 
might suppose from reading the newspapers in Washington. 

If the Office of Communications had found it easy to acquire an ideal 
and inexpensive location from which to operate, they were challenged a 
good deal more in establishing the communications links to Washington. 
The problem came from the fact that we needed to install in Little Rock an 
unusually capable system that allowed us to transmit a quantity and qual¬ 
ity of material significantly greater than anything we had previously done 
for VIP support on the road. In normal circumstances, traveling PDB 
recipients receive a black and white document transmitted via a rather 
basic secure fax system. As a result of work that was already under way in 
Washington, it was clear that we had the hardware and software capability 
to deliver a very high quality version of the PDB to Governor Clinton in 
Little Rock. The system had never been field-tested, however, so we 


20 



needed to be sure we had a reliable and redundant capability. The equip¬ 
ment that was installed allowed us to input text at Headquarters and 
immediately receive and edit it at the other end. It also allowed us to 
transmit very high quality color graphics, maps, and imagery. 

Over and above the PDB operation, we were able with this capable 
communications system to send large numbers of documents in both 
directions to support the briefing operation on a real-time basis. This capa¬ 
bility was invaluable in enabling us to answer questions and provide back¬ 
ground material to Governor Clinton and his aides. Over time the Agency 
team became sufficiently adept at using the new equipment that it could 
replicate the process in California when Governor Clinton traveled there 
over the Thanksgiving holiday and at Hilton Head, South Carolina, where 
he spent several days after Christmas. 

In large part because of the hard work of our people at Headquarters, 
we were able to publish a book indistinguishable from the one published 
by the Agency’s printing plant. Personnel in Washington put in countless 
hours of overtime to provide 24-hour support of all kinds. Their mastery 
of the digitized color graphics process was but one critical contribution. 
All who participated in this operation thought it set a standard that we 
should seek to emulate for future VIP on-the-road support. 

Looking back, we flinched to discover that our undertaking in Little 
Rock was by no means inexpensive, even though the cost of hotel rooms 
was a modest $38.50 per night. Substantial expenditures were made for 
personnel rotation and accommodations, computer equipment and com¬ 
munications lines, and per diem expenses. By inauguration day, we had 
incurred expenses in excess of a quarter million dollars. 


What Was Accomplished 

By any quantitative measure, we succeeded in the primary purpose 
of providing intelligence briefings to help the President-elect become well 
informed about international developments. Governor Clinton read hun¬ 
dreds of intelligence reports on current developments relating to US inter¬ 
ests. A large proportion of these reports addressed subjects that were of 
high priority to him personally, including Bosnia, Somalia, and Haiti. One 
cannot know precisely how valuable this intelligence reporting may have 
been, but we did observe with satisfaction that Governor Clinton read the 
material daily and carefully. 

Beyond the PDB briefings, the Agency provided a great deal of ad 
hoc support. We saw this material being used to prepare for meetings and 
telephone calls to foreign leaders and in other policy deliberations. On a 
more pedestrian level, we were struck that the Clinton team turned to the 
CIA for help with such things as acquiring safes for secure storage and 


21 



arranging for the establishment of secure communications between Little 
Rock and Washington. At varying times we functioned not only as repre¬ 
sentatives of the Intelligence Community but as surrogates for the State 
Department, the Joint Chiefs, the Department of Defense, and the General 
Services Administration. 

At no time did we seek or receive any systematic feedback from 
Governor Clinton on the assistance we were providing, but he was appre¬ 
ciative throughout the transition period. And we have some independent 
accounts of his reactions. Former President Bush recalls, for example, that 
when the Clintons visited the White House after the election, the Gover¬ 
nor “went out of his way to tell me the briefings were useful and he 
planned to continue them.” Bush added that Governor Clinton “told me 
the CIA information made a big difference on Haiti. He said that the 
Agency's intelligence made an impact on him and was influential in the 
decisions he subsequently took.” 

Immediately after the election, Bush had delegated to Scowcroft the 
job of dealing with the Clinton team regarding the intelligence briefings. 
During the Clintons' visit to the White House, however, Bush under¬ 
scored how useful CIA's daily briefings had been to him and urged the 
President-elect to continue to receive them when in office. Bush says he 
also stressed the need to limit the distribution of the PDB. “I told him you 
had to control and limit access so that the Agency could put everything in 
the book.” 

CIA employees felt their efforts rewarded when President Clinton 
spoke of this briefing process during a visit to the Agency’s headquarters 
in Virginia on 4 January 1994, after almost a full year in office. The Presi¬ 
dent observed, “Intelligence is a unique mission. Nobody knows that bet¬ 
ter than those of us who have the honor to serve in the Oval Office. When 
President Truman autographed the photo of himself that hangs in this 
building, he wrote, To the CIA, a necessity to the president of the United 
States, from one who knows.’ Every morning, the president begins the 
day asking what happened overnight. What do we know? How do we 
know it? Like my predecessors, I have to look to the intelligence commu¬ 
nity for those answers to those questions. I look to you to warn me and, 
through me, our nation of the threats, to spotlight the important trends in 
the world, to describe dynamics that could affect our interests around the 
world.” 

From the Agency’s institutional point of view, establishing the prac¬ 
tice of regular briefings of the President and senior national security offi¬ 
cials met our primary goal in the Little Rock operation. In fact, the current 
system of PDB briefings is among the most satisfactory we have had. We 
have met with the President and cabinet-level officers on a daily basis 


22 



over an extended period in only two previous cases: throughout the presi¬ 
dency of George Bush and for a fifteen-month period during the presi¬ 
dency of Gerald Ford. 

The Little Rock undertaking also enabled Agency personnel to meet 
a large proportion of the people who were to become prominent in the 
Clinton administration. Senior Agency briefers established at least some 
relationship with all those who later became key White House figures. We 
had an opportunity to meet all of those appointed to the top national secu¬ 
rity posts and the majority of other Cabinet-level appointees. Each of the 
new appointees was exposed to the Agency’s role in supporting the Presi¬ 
dent-elect. On one occasion a new Cabinet appointee was clearly sur¬ 
prised to see Agency briefers waiting to see the Governor and inquired 
about the frequency with which such briefings were given, asking if they 
occurred weekly or on some other basis. The questioner was obviously 
surprised and impressed when told that the Agency briefed each day. 

All Agency personnel involved in the Little Rock operation—in 
Arkansas and at Headquarters—came to have a sense of satisfaction and 
pride in what they were able to accomplish. Each was also aware, how¬ 
ever, of the unique opportunity they had been given and of their good luck 
that the operation worked out as well as it did. 


23 




Chapter 2 


Truman and Eisenhower: Launching the 

Process 


On 22 November 1952, the newspapers reported that President Harry 
Truman, shortly after noon the previous day, had stolen away from the 
White House to give an “impromptu” speech at the Central Intelligence 
Agency. Truman had come to CIA at the invitation of the fourth Director 
of Central Intelligence, Gen. Walter Bedell Smith, to address a training 
course of government officials. In that speech—delivered on a Friday 
afternoon almost two weeks after the national election—Truman revealed 
a great deal about his motives in founding the CIA and his aims in having 
the Agency provide intelligence briefings to the new President-elect, Gen. 
Dwight Eisenhower. 

The President reminisced with his audience about how there had 
been no CIA when he had succeeded to the presidency in 1945. At that 
time, by many accounts, he had been surprised to discover how much 
information relating to intelligence and national security matters had been 
withheld from him. The most dramatic evidence of how ill-informed he 
was came on his 12th day in office when Secretary of War Henry Stimson 
briefed him for the first time on the Manhattan (atomic bomb) Project, 
about which Truman had heard only hints while serving as Vice President 
and on key Senate committees. 1 

Truman also recalled how difficult it had been for him to obtain 
information from the various government departments, each of which 
seemed “walled off’ from the others. On various occasions Truman had 
lamented to Smith that he “used to do all this myself.” The President 
noted that this situation had been corrected over the intervening years, 
saying that the CIA’s global intelligence operations and procedures for 
forwarding information had made it possible to “keep the President 


1 David McCullough, Truman (New York: Simon and Shuster, 1992), pp. 376-378. 


25 




Gen. Walter Bedell Smith relieves RAdm. Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter as Director of 
Central Intelligence in October 1950. 

informed better than ever before.” In a rather backhanded compliment, 
Truman said he believed that “we have an intelligence information service 
now that I think is not inferior to any in the world.” 2 


2 The New York Times, 22 November 1952, pp. 1,10. 


26 











Truman was responsible for the very existence of that intelligence 
service. Within a year of his becoming President, in January 1946, he 
formed the Central Intelligence Group (CIG). In the President’s mind, its 
key responsibility was to ensure that he personally received intelligence 
reports on a timely basis. On 15 February 1946 the CIG launched the 
Daily Summary , and in June a counterpart Weekly Summary was produced 
for the first time. Both these publications were sent to the White House for 
the President. Both the daily and weekly publications continued to be pub¬ 
lished after the Central Intelligence Group became the Central Intelli¬ 
gence Agency in September of 1947. 

There was much bureaucratic wrangling throughout the early years 
of the Central Intelligence Group and the Central Intelligence Agency 
about their proper role in the production of current intelligence. Virtually 
all key players involved with intelligence—in the military services, the 
War (later Defense) Department, and the State Department—had serious 
reservations about the new intelligence agency duplicating their work in 
current intelligence. The President was virtually alone in expecting to 
receive a daily, comprehensive current intelligence product, whatever the 
formal charters of the CIG and CIA might say. Needless to say, his expec¬ 
tations carried the day. 

To consolidate the production of current intelligence, CIA in January 
1951 formed the Office of Current Intelligence (OCI), which existed until 
the late 1970s when its functions were assumed by other offices. The CIA 
officers who formed OCI were already preparing a closely held, all-source 
weekly intelligence publication, the first of its kind, called the Situation 
Summary. This was a global review, built around the Korean situation and 
its worldwide implications that formed the basis for General Smith’s 
weekly briefings of the President. Shortly after the establishment of OCI, 
two new publications were inaugurated for wider distribution. The daily 
publication became the Current Intelligence Bulletin , first issued on 
28 February 1951; in August a companion weekly publication, the Current 
Intelligence Weekly Review , was begun. 

Managers of OCI felt their early efforts had been rewarded when 
Truman, vacationing in Key West, Florida, wrote of the new publication, 
“Dear Bedel [sic], I have been reading the intelligence bulletin and I am 
highly impressed with it. I believe you have hit the jackpot with this one. 
Sincerely, Harry Truman.” 3 The Current Intelligence Bulletin continued 
largely unchanged for the next 25 years. 

While Truman received, read, and expressed his appreciation for the 
Agency’s daily and weekly publications, it had become clear over the 
years that he especially valued the oral briefings delivered by the directors 
of CIA. The President experimented with various procedures for these 
briefings, and in the early years there were periods when he received them 


1 Harry Truman’s letter to Bedell Smith, 8 March 1951. 


27 



on a daily basis. What finally proved most satisfactory, however, were 
weekly worldwide intelligence updates. 

The weekly briefings worked best during the extended period when 
“Beedle” Smith served as DCI. Smith briefed Truman each Friday, 
accompanied at the White House by a CIA officer, Meredith Davidson. 
Davidson would assist the Director in the preparation of his material (a 
notebook was left behind with the President each week), but he did not 
normally go into the Oval Office. The briefing was based primarily on the 
Situation Summary , which was prepared with the President’s needs in 
mind. Davidson’s reward was to join the DCI and the President’s Special 
Consultant for National Security Affairs, Sidney Souers (who had served 
as the first DCI for a five-month period in 1946), for coffee and a post¬ 
mortem on the President’s reactions and follow-up requests. 4 

Mindful of how useful the weekly briefings were to him, Truman 
determined that intelligence information should be provided to the candi¬ 
dates in the 1952 election as soon as they were selected. In the summer of 
1952, the President raised this idea with Smith. He indicated he wanted 
the Agency to brief Gen. Dwight Eisenhower and Governor Adlai Steven¬ 
son, remarking at the time, “There were so many things I did not know 
when I became President.” Smith suggested to Truman that Davidson 
might be the proper individual to brief both Eisenhower and Stevenson to 
ensure they were receiving the same information. 

Later, during his speech at the Agency on 21 November, Truman 
explained his rationale in providing briefings to the President-elect. He 
observed that the office of the President of the United States “now carries 
power beyond parallel in history,” adding, “that is the principal reason 
why I am so anxious that it be a continuing proposition and that the suc¬ 
cessor to me and the successor to him can carry on as if no election had 
ever taken place. I am giving this president—this new president—more 
information than any other president had when he went into office.” 

Referring to a widely publicized meeting he had held with Eisen¬ 
hower at the White House to discuss foreign policy issues earlier that 
same week, Truman said, “It was my privilege a few days ago 
(18 November) to brief the General who is going to take over the office on 
the 20th of January.” Truman did not mention in his address that on that 
occasion he had given Eisenhower a comprehensive National Intelligence 
Digest prepared by the CIA. Keyed to an NSC policy outline, the Digest 
summarized, in Smith’s words, “the most important national intelligence 
on a worldwide basis.” 5 


4 Meredith Davidson, interviews by the author in Frederick, Maryland, 26 March and 25 October 
1993. Unless otherwise indicated, the numerous references that follow concerning Davidson’s 
briefings of Stevenson and Eisenhower come from these interviews. 

5 Walter Bedell Smith, Memorandum for the President, 9 January 1953. 


28 



Eisenhower wrote in his memoirs more than a decade later that his 
meeting with Truman “added little to my knowledge.” He recalled that 
Truman “received me cordially; however...the conversations...were nec¬ 
essarily general and official in nature. So far as defense affairs were 
concerned, under the instructions of the President, I had been briefed peri¬ 
odically by Gen. Walter Bedell Smith and his assistants in the Central 
Intelligence Agency on developments in the Korean war and on national 
security.” 6 According to Davidson, Truman told Smith he “had kept it 
general on purpose, for political reasons.” 


Strained Relations Complicate the Arrangements 

In his remarks at the Agency, Truman could not bring himself to be 
completely deferential to his successor. In a mild dig, he observed that 
Eisenhower had been “rather appalled at all that the President needs to 
know in order to reach decisions.” In private, the President was bitingly 
critical of his elected successor. The press, for its part, was reporting that 
the meeting of the two men at the White House had been “coolly formal.” 
The New York Times , for example, noted “there was some evidence of ten¬ 
sion between Mr. Truman and his successor,” observing also that “the 
President-elect looked serious and was somewhat brusque when he left 
the President’s office.” 7 

While Truman’s motives appear to have been straightforward in pro¬ 
viding information to enable Eisenhower to assume the presidency fully 
informed, the implementation of his intentions left something to be 
desired and prompted suspicions on the part of Eisenhower and his staff. 
Indeed, tensions between the two came close to undermining the planned 
briefing process and with it the Agency’s access to the President-elect dur¬ 
ing the important transition period. Ironically, the ultimate result was to 
elicit from Eisenhower a statement making clear he saw the CIA as a rela¬ 
tively apolitical provider of information. In the end he was willing to hear 
from the CIA things he was unwilling to hear from others. 

A difficult private exchange between the President and his eventual 
successor had begun shortly after the Republican convention, when Tru¬ 
man sent telegrams to Eisenhower and Stevenson inviting them to lunch 
with his Cabinet on Tuesday, 19 August. Truman proposed that he ask 
Smith and other CIA officers to brief “on the foreign situation” and have 

6 Dwight Eisenhower, Mandate for Change, 1953-1956 (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1963), 
p. 85. 

7 The New York Times , 19 November 1952, pp. 1,18. 


29 



the White House staff report on other issues as well. In his telegram, Tru¬ 
man also extended an offer of weekly intelligence briefings for both can¬ 
didates. 8 

Eisenhower declined the invitation. In reply, he told Truman he 
thought he should receive “only those communications from the outgoing 
Administration that could be known to all the American people.” Eisen¬ 
hower added that, “The problems which you suggest for discussion are 
those with which I have lived for many years.” The General concluded 
with a paragraph indicating he would welcome weekly reports from the 
CIA, but he wanted it understood that his possession of those reports 
“would not limit his freedom to discuss or analyze foreign programs as he 
wanted.” 9 

The White House, obviously irritated that Eisenhower had declined 
Truman’s personal invitation, released the texts of the telegrams from both 
men. What was not released to the public—nor, so far as I can tell, known 
to senior CIA managers at the time—was a very direct note that Truman 
had written by hand and sent to Eisenhower at his campaign headquarters 
in Denver on 16 August. In that note Truman indicated he was sorry if he 
had caused Eisenhower embarrassment with the luncheon invitation, but 
he underscored that his intention was to provide information that would 
permit a continuous, uninterrupted foreign policy despite the change of 
administrations. 

In language only Truman would use, he wrote, “Partisan politics 
should stop at the boundaries of the United States. I am extremely sorry 
that you have allowed a bunch of screwballs to come between us.” Tru¬ 
man added, “You have made a bad mistake, and I’m hoping it won’t injure 
this great Republic. There has never been one like it and I want to see it 
continues regardless of the man who occupies the most important position 
in the history of the world. May God guide you and give you light.” 10 

After reading Truman’s note, Eisenhower obviously decided there 
was no point in responding in kind and sent back to Truman, on 
19 August, a relatively conciliatory reply, also handwritten. Eisenhower 
reiterated the thought that, for political reasons and in the absence of any 
national emergency, he should not meet with the outgoing President and 
Cabinet and thus had declined the invitation. He repeated his appreciation 
for the offer to send him weekly CIA reports, opined that those would be 
sufficient to keep him up-to-date on developments abroad, and assured 
Truman of his support for a bipartisan foreign policy. 11 


K Harry Truman telegram to Dwight Eisenhower, 14 August 1952. A similar telegram was sent to 
Adlai Stevenson. 

9 Dwight Eisenhower telegram to Harry Truman, 14 August 1952. 

10 Harry Truman letter to Dwight Eisenhower, 16 August 1952. Maintained in the holdings of the 
Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas. 

11 Dwight Eisenhower letter to Harry Truman, 19 August 1952. Eisenhower Library. 


30 



Although Eisenhower had taken a relatively moderate tone in his 
reply to Truman’s outburst, he clearly was bothered by the overall 
exchange and indicated as much in separate correspondence with Smith. 
The General felt free to be open with Smith; they had worked closely 
together during the war in Europe when Smith served for an extended 
period as his Chief of Staff. 

Following Eisenhower’s nomination, Smith had sent a note of con¬ 
gratulations that Eisenhower had not acknowledged before the exchange 
with Truman over the briefings in mid-August. In a letter stamped “Per¬ 
sonal and Confidential” dated 14 August, Eisenhower thanked Smith for 
his note of congratulations the previous month, but then launched imme¬ 
diately into some observations on his exchange with Truman. “The past 
two days my whole headquarters has been in a little bit of a steaming stew 
over an incident in which, according to the papers, you were at least 
briefly involved. It was the meeting that Governor Stevenson had with the 
President and the Cabinet. According to the reports reaching here, you 
were brought in to help brief the Governor on the world situation.” 12 
Eisenhower expressed his understanding that the briefing of Stevenson 
had taken only a very few minutes but underscored that, “To the political 
mind it looked like the outgoing Administration was canvassing all its 
resources in order to support Stevenson’s election.” The General went on 
to stress the importance of doing what is right, recalling the challenges he 
and Smith had faced together in Europe during the war. 

The lecture from Eisenhower caused great pain to his longtime friend 
and admirer (one former Agency officer recalls that “it upset the hell out 
of Beedle”). Nevertheless, in a reply to Eisenhower dated 18 August, 
Smith made no mention of the critical note. Rather, he offered in rather 
formal language the briefings that Smith had discussed with the President 
and which the President, in turn, had offered to Eisenhower. Smith pro¬ 
posed that he provide Eisenhower information on the world situation like 
that the President received each Friday morning, and that this information 
should be delivered by an officer of the CIA. Smith’s letter was delivered 
to Eisenhower in Denver. 13 Fortunately for the Agency, in light of the ten¬ 
sion that had developed, Eisenhower accepted the invitation to receive 
CIA briefings. 

Eisenhower’s “turning over of command” ceremony had been held at 
SHAPE (Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe) in Paris on 
30 May 1952. The following day the General, Mrs. Eisenhower, and 
Eisenhower’s personal staff departed Europe for Washington. Although he 
had been on leave without pay from his post as President of Columbia 


12 Dwight Eisenhower letter to Walter Bedell Smith, 14 August 1952. Eisenhower Library. 

13 Walter Bedell Smith letter to Dwight Eisenhower, 18 August 1952. 


31 



University since early 1951, Eisenhower had continued to use the Univer¬ 
sity home at 60 Momingside Drive in Manhattan when he was in the city. 
This residence became his headquarters for the next several months, and it 
was here that the first briefing by the CIA occurred. 


Preelection Briefings 

The first briefing was on Saturday morning, 30 August, by Melvin 
Hendrickson, then head of the military branch in OCI’s “Indications 
Staff.” Like many Agency officers at the time, Hendrickson had several 
years of Army experience; his last post had been assistant military attache 
in Oslo. 14 With military precision, Eisenhower entered the library of his 
residence exactly at 7:45 to receive Hendrickson and an accompanying 
security officer, the two being introduced as “the gentlemen from CIA.” 
Eisenhower suggested that they move to an adjoining smaller room. 

The General took about 20 minutes to read carefully through the 
briefing material but paid scant attention to the information on the disposi¬ 
tion of Soviet and satellite armed forces after confirming with Hendrick¬ 
son that there had been no significant changes in their deployment since 
his briefings by the US Army in Europe some months earlier. There was 
more extended discussion of the situation in Iran, of France’s growing dif¬ 
ficulties in North Africa, and regarding trade between Japan and China. 
The latter subject was discussed in the context of the war in Korea and the 
ongoing armistice talks. Eisenhower commented specifically, “Since trade 
is one of our most powerful weapons, it seems to me that we should 
employ it to its maximum. Where are the Japanese going to get their 
materials if they can’t get them from China?” Concerning the North Afri¬ 
can situation, the General’s bottom line was a cryptic “If the French don’t 
do something fairly soon, they will have another Indo-China on their 
hands.” At the conclusion of this first substantive discussion, Eisenhower 
indicated that he would like to receive future similar briefings. 15 


14 Melvin Hendrickson, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 23 March 1993. Unless oth¬ 
erwise indicated, the references to his briefings of Eisenhower come from this interview. In dis¬ 
cussing that first briefing, Hendrickson said his most vivid memory was of Eisenhower’s 
powerful welcoming handshake, saying “You had to be careful or he would squeeze your fingers 
off.” 

15 Melvin Hendrickson, Memorandum for the Record, “Briefing of General Eisenhower - 30 Au¬ 
gust 1952,” 5 September 1952. As a reminder of how things change in 40 years, one cannot help 
noting that the Agency’s New York office provided the visiting CIA team a chauffeur-driven Ca¬ 
dillac for their twenty-minute trip from midtown to Columbia University on the upper west side. 
Conversely, some things never change. The team reported in their memorandum for the record 
that, when they returned later that day to New York’s LaGuardia Airport for their flight to Wash¬ 
ington, they discovered their reservations were for a flight departing from Idlewild (now JFK) 
Airport. They changed their reservation and arrived back at CIA’s “Que” building in Washington 
by midaftemoon. Among the stories Hendrickson told his colleagues was an account of his plea¬ 
sure at having met not only General Eisenhower but also Mrs. Eisenhower and their grandchil¬ 
dren. 


32 



During the remaining weeks before the election on 4 November, 
Eisenhower received three additional briefings from CIA. The second in 
the series took place on 25 September when the General was in the midst 
of an extended whistlestop campaign tour. He had flown from New York 
to Moline, Illinois, and from there had traveled virtually nonstop through 
numerous small towns in Illinois, Iowa, Nebraska, Missouri, West Vir¬ 
ginia, and finally Maryland. CIA’s Hendrickson boarded the train in Silver 
Spring, Maryland, and briefed Eisenhower during the short trip into Balti¬ 
more. 

During a subsequent period of almost nonstop campaigning, Eisen¬ 
hower blocked out two weekends for rest. One was when the Eisenhowers 
were staying at the Brown Palace Hotel in Denver, Mrs. Eisenhower’s 
hometown. Hendrickson provided the third preelection briefing at the cou¬ 
ple’s Brown Palace suite on 11 October, again a Saturday morning. On 
this occasion, Eisenhower, in turn, provided Hendrickson one of the more 
unusual experiences intelligence officers have had. Hendrickson recalls 
being invited to join the General and Mrs. Eisenhower at a rodeo in Den¬ 
ver that weekend. The Eisenhowers were driven around the rodeo grounds 
in a stagecoach. Hendrickson rode shotgun, up top with the driver. 

The fourth and final preelection briefing was on 25 October, ten days 
before the election. Eisenhower had been campaigning in Detroit and had 
taken an overnight train to New York. This time Hendrickson boarded the 
campaign train in the early morning at Harmon Station, New York, and 
briefed Eisenhower as they traveled to Grand Central in New York City. 

During each of the briefings during the preelection period, Eisen¬ 
hower spent 15 to 20 minutes studying the written material and, typically, 
another 10 to 15 minutes discussing that material and other items on his 
mind. He asked few specific factual questions but did make comments on 
a wide spectrum of issues, primarily the Soviet, Korean, and Iranian situa¬ 
tions, which were at the forefront of US Government attention in 1952. 
Eisenhower also read carefully and commented on Agency materials 
relating to security arrangements for the prospective Middle East collec¬ 
tive security alliance then under consideration. 16 

The package of written briefing materials presented to Eisenhower 
(and Stevenson) at each meeting typically included 20 or more short 
items—one or two paragraphs in length—summarizing the current situa¬ 
tion in a specific country of interest. Events in the USSR, Iran, Korea, 
Egypt, Yugoslavia, and Japan were included in almost all sessions, but in 
the course of the briefings more than 50 countries were addressed. In addi¬ 
tion, there was normally one longer article on a priority country, Iran 

16 Hendrickson prepared very brief memorandums for the record concerning the second and 
fourth briefings, dated 29 September and 28 October, respectively; no written record has been 
found of the third briefing, held in Denver. 


33 



being the most common. Each package also contained the “Conclusions” 
of one or two recently published National Intelligence Estimates. The lat¬ 
ter typically assessed the prospects for Communist expansionism in dif¬ 
ferent regions of the world. 

The General, while a candidate, was appreciative of the preelection 
briefings, commenting that they had been very helpful. At the conclusion 
of the fourth session, however, he added—clearly referring to the Soviet 
Union and Korea—that he “missed the G-3 information” (US military 
plans and operations) that he observed “was essential for a complete 
understanding of those situations.” Eisenhower also commented that “if 
he got the job, some other arrangement would have to be made for the 
briefings.” He mentioned specifically securing clearances for some of his 
staff so that they, too, could benefit from the information being provided. 

In an intriguing parting comment, Eisenhower mentioned to Hen¬ 
drickson, “When you get back to Bedell Smith, tell him if I get elected 
I’ve got a job for him.” Decades after the fact, it has proved impossible to 
establish whether this comment was passed to the DCI personally. In an 
interesting coincidence of timing, however, Smith, less than a week later 
on 1 November, forwarded to President Truman a written request to resign 
his post as DCI and to retire from active military service. 17 


Support to the President-Elect 18 

One day after he was elected President, Eisenhower on 5 November 
1952 traveled to Augusta, Georgia, for two weeks’ vacation. When the 
CIA briefings resumed late in the month, the most significant thing that 
had changed was that they were no longer given by Hendrickson but by 
General Smith, accompanied by Davidson. The first session following the 
election was held on 21 November, this time again on the train as the 
President-elect traveled from New York to Washington for a reunion din¬ 
ner of his US Military Academy classmates at the Army-Navy Club. The 
train stopped at Baltimore to permit Smith and Davidson to board and talk 
with the President-elect on the remaining leg into Washington. 

By coincidence, Davidson, while still working in Army Intelligence, 
had briefed Eisenhower on a couple of occasions at the Pentagon just after 
the war. To Davidson’s astonishment, when he was escorted into the Presi¬ 
dent-elect’s car, Eisenhower immediately brightened as he recognized him 


17 Walter Bedell Smith letter to Harry Truman, 1 November 1952. Eisenhower Library. 

18 Memorandums for the record have not been found in CIA files regarding the postelection brief¬ 
ings of Eisenhower, and there is reason to doubt that any exist. Davidson, who accompanied 
Smith to the first two sessions, remembers asking the DCI after the first meeting “whether there 
was anything he wanted me to write. He said ‘No.’ Beedle would have been happy if nothing had 
been written.’’ This attitude of the DCI also explains why the memorandums written by Davidson 
and Hendrickson, even about briefings in which Smith did not participate, were so cryptic. 


34 



and extended a warm greeting. In a jocular exchange, Davidson explained 
that he had not served in Europe as Eisenhower had, rather he “had been 
fighting the big war in the Pacific.” 

Smith cautioned Eisenhower that “you had better watch out, he has 
been briefing the opposition,” referring to Davidson’s sessions with 
Stevenson in Springfield, Illinois. This joking remark caused Eisenhower 
to turn deadly serious. Davidson was impressed that Eisenhower wanted 
to hear no jokes about Stevenson and was very positive about the 
Agency’s briefings of the Governor. Eisenhower observed that he thought 
very highly of Stevenson because he had kept the campaign on a high 
plane and demonstrated mastery of foreign affairs. 

The relaxed social exchange with the Eisenhowers (both General and 
Mrs. Eisenhower were in dressing gowns) continued almost until the train 
had completed its late-evening run to Washington. The substantive part of 
the briefing, therefore, continued while they were parked at Union Station. 
Subjects of particular interest again included events in Korea and the 
negotiations under way to bring the conflict to an end. But Smith also pro¬ 
vided an overview of the general world situation. 

Because the DCI himself was now conducting the briefings, and 
because of the preexisting relationship between Eisenhower and Smith, 
the session involved substantially more give-and-take than had been the 
case before the election. A more serious analysis of the issues was also to 
be expected because Eisenhower, like all presidents-elect, realized he 
would have to grapple with the world’s problems within a matter of 
weeks. Eisenhower asked a number of questions, particularly about the 
political aspects of the Korean quagmire. He especially wanted to clarify 
in his own mind what China was up to and to understand better that coun¬ 
try’s role and motivations in the conflict. Eisenhower asked, for example, 
“I never did know why we let the Chinese call themselves volunteers?” In 
reply, Smith explained the nuances of the situation, concluding by saying, 
“We didn’t have to bomb Peking—that’s why we acquiesced.” 

Well after midnight, Smith and Davidson took their leave of the Pres¬ 
ident-elect at Union Station. General and Mrs. Eisenhower spent the night 
in their Pullman car on the train. Mrs. Eisenhower had been an active par¬ 
ticipant throughout the discussions. Davidson recalls that “she gave me 
the impression of being much more political than Ike.” 

In Eisenhower’s memoirs he recalls that “In a Detroit speech on 
October 24, I announced my intention, if elected, to go to Korea before 
the following January and to determine for myself what the conditions 
were in that unhappy country.” For some days Eisenhower and his closest 

V 


35 



advisers had been discussing the wisdom of making this dramatic pro¬ 
posal public. 19 Once it was announced, the idea was very well received 
and, in fact, has been cited by many observers as having clinched the 
Eisenhower victory 10 days later. 

After the election, while preparing for his trip to Korea, Eisenhower 
telephoned Smith to inform him that he was not comfortable relying 
exclusively on US Army information regarding what was going on in 
Korea; he wanted the DCI to come to New York to give him the Agency’s 
independent assessment. The President-elect called at virtually the last 
moment and emphasized that their visit should be given no publicity. 

In keeping with their interpretation of Eisenhower’s instructions, 
Army security officers took Smith and Davidson to the briefing location in 
New York via a circuitous route. The two were led in the front door of a 
drugstore and out the back, for example, in a counterintelligence maneu¬ 
ver that served only to enrage the always-impatient Smith. Ironically, they 
reached Eisenhower’s office in the Commodore Hotel for an afternoon 
appointment that had been wedged into a day filled with a dozen other 
well-publicized visitors. Smith and Davidson were waiting in an outer 
office as a luncheon group hosted by Eisenhower broke up. Smith was 
surprised to see Gen. William Donovan, the founder of the Office of Stra¬ 
tegic Services, among those leaving the General’s office. 

Because the President-elect had requested Smith’s frank and personal 
assessment of the situation in Korea, the two generals were alone for most 
of the briefing session. Near the end of the session, Davidson was called 
in to answer two or three factual questions. Eisenhower departed secretly 
for Korea early the following day, 29 November. 

Smith took very seriously his responsibility to provide an indepen¬ 
dent assessment. He had insisted that his CIA staff derive facts about mili¬ 
tary developments from the US Army and Navy but jealously guarded his 
prerogatives as DCI to make assessments and estimates based on those 
facts. By chance, Smith and Davidson ran into John Foster Dulles in the 
lobby of the Waldorf Astoria hotel shortly after they had seen Eisenhower 
at the Commodore. Dulles elicited confirmation that they had seen Eisen¬ 
hower and asked what they told him. Smith responded with a curt, “That’s 
between him and me.” 

The late-November visit to the President-elect’s office also created a 
bit of momentary tension with the Secret Service. Smith was sometimes 
reluctant to have a protective officer from the Agency’s Office of Security 
accompany him and would override vigorous recommendations to the 
contrary by CIA’s Director of Security, Sheffield Edwards. In this case, 
the DCI adamantly opposed having additional people accompany him to 
New York given the ground rules Eisenhower had set regarding secrecy. 


19 Eisenhower, Mandate for Change , p. 72. 


36 



Edwards earlier had approached Davidson, insisting that he become weap- 
ons-qualified so he could protect the DCI. On the train from Washington 
to New York, the DCI learned that Davidson was carrying a weapon and 
challenged, “Edwards got to you, didn't he?" The DCFs reaction was 
mild, however, compared with that of Secret Service officers when they 
discovered that Davidson was carrying a weapon during incidental con¬ 
versation in the President-elect’s outer office. 

The private meeting between Eisenhower and Smith on 28 Novem¬ 
ber went on for more than an hour and allowed the two to conduct some 
intelligence business beyond their discussion of Korea. During that ses¬ 
sion Smith secured Eisenhower’s approval of a proposal that CIA should 
establish a briefing facility in New York City to provide continuous sup¬ 
port to Eisenhower and his staff. The facility was subsequently set up, but 
not as close to Eisenhower’s as Smith would have liked. Agency officers 
recall that Sherman Adams, who was to become Eisenhower’s Chief of 
Staff, intervened to ensure that the CIA office was “a broom closet some 
distance from the President’s office.’’ Adams obviously did not want 
Smith to have the same access to the new president that he enjoyed with 
Truman. 

The Agency maintained its office in the Commodore from 
28 November through the end of the transition period in January 1953. A 
CIA briefing officer representing the DCI was present at all times. For 
most of the period the officer was Ed Beatty, a former newsman who was 
editor of CIA’s Current Intelligence Bulletin . Each day a courier from 
Washington would bring to the New York office the latest current intelli¬ 
gence products for use by the President-elect and his staff. Eisenhower’s 
staff did utilize this facility, and Adams himself came by seeking informa¬ 
tion on at least one occasion. Eisenhower, however, relied exclusively on 
the briefings provided by the DCI. 

During the transition period in late 1952 the press occasionally wrote 
of the DCI’s “weekly’’ briefings of the President-elect. But, in fact, the 
General’s schedule did not permit briefings on any regular schedule. His 
trip to Korea and the Pacific took more than two weeks, with the result 
that the next CIA briefing did not occur until 19 December. Eisenhower 
was accompanied at that meeting by Adams and Smith by Deputy Direc¬ 
tor for Intelligence Robert Amory. Specifically labeled “off the record’’ on 
Eisenhower’s calendar, it was a session Smith would rather not have 
attended. He entered Eisenhower’s office in high spirits but came out 
crushed. Sitting in morose silence all the way back to Washington, he 
finally muttered, “And I thought that it was going to be great.’’ Smith 
never explained what had happened. 

He had offered his resignation in writing to President Truman some 
six weeks before, obviously hoping for a challenging appointment from 
his old friend and colleague. It was widely known at the time that Smith 


37 



aspired, perhaps unrealistically, to be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff. Agency historians have surmised that Eisenhower informed Smith 
he would not be appointed Chairman of the Joint Staff, asking him instead 
to serve as Under Secretary of State. 

Smith did, in fact, serve in the number two job at the Department of 
State during the first year and a half of Eisenhower’s first term. But it was 
no secret that he did not enjoy being the Under Secretary. He felt uncom¬ 
fortable with the nonmilitary way the Department functioned, he did not 
like John Foster Dulles, and he was uneasy about Allen Dulles’s appoint¬ 
ment as DCI. 

The last occasion on which Smith is known to have met with Eisen¬ 
hower while serving as DCI was on 14 January 1953 in New York City. 
There Smith joined John Foster Dulles and other Eisenhower advisers and 
appointees for an extended foreign policy conference with the President¬ 
elect. Less than a week later, on 20 January, Eisenhower was inaugurated. 


The New President as an Intelligence Consumer 

To no one’s surprise, Eisenhower’s preferences on how he should 
receive intelligence support did not change once he became President. 
CIA histories indicate that the day after his inauguration in 1953 the 
Agency’s Director of Current Intelligence, Huntington Sheldon, sent to 
James Lay, Jr., the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council, a 
list of publications the Agency could furnish the White House. It quickly 
became apparent, however, that the President did not want to receive writ¬ 
ten intelligence materials on a regular basis and had no interest in frequent 
briefings by CIA experts. As had been his preference during the transition 
period, the President relied instead on periodic high-level briefings. 

The practice that developed and continued throughout the eight years 
of the Eisenhower presidency involved the Director of Central Intelli¬ 
gence, Allen Dulles, providing weekly briefings to the National Security 
Council. Eisenhower chaired these NSC meetings, and under his leader¬ 
ship they were more regular and more formal than under any president 
before or since. He told President-elect Kennedy in 1960 that the NSC 
“had become the most important weekly meeting of the government.” 20 

The NSC met every Thursday morning at 9:00 a.m. and with rare 
exceptions opened its meetings with an intelligence briefing by the DCI. 
The briefing addressed subjects mutually agreed with Lay of the NSC 
staff, representing the interests of the President’s Special Assistant for 
National Security Affairs, Gen. Robert Cutler. If the President, Cutler, or 


20 Dwight Eisenhower, Waging Peace (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1965), p. 712. 


38 



Lay did not have specific subjects they wanted addressed, the CIA was 
free to propose its own agenda, although the Agency’s ideas were always 
vetted with Lay before the briefing. 

Agency veterans remember a wide variety of subjects being 
addressed at the NSC meetings, reflecting the President’s broad interests. 
He was intrigued with matters ranging from Italian elections, to the battle 
of Dien Bien Phu, to periodic updates on Agency covert action operations. 
Eisenhower would interrupt periodically with questions and, within limits, 
permit questions from others as well. When his patience ran out, however, 
he was not at all reluctant to cut off discussion, saying “OK Allen, let’s go 
ahead.” 

According to Gen. Andrew Goodpaster, who served as Secretary of 
the White House Staff, Eisenhower expected Dulles to provide the latest 
intelligence on the crisis of the moment but, more important, to concen¬ 
trate primarily on providing the intelligence background to whatever 
larger or longer term planning issue was on the agenda. Because of this 
long-term focus, most of the briefing materials used by the DCI were pre¬ 
pared by CIA’s Office of National Estimates. Goodpaster recalls that 
Eisenhower frequently would ask, “How solid is that information—where 
does it come from?” Dulles was reluctant to answer “with fourteen people 
in the room.” Eisenhower, Dulles, and one staff aide (sometimes Good¬ 
paster and sometimes Senior Staff Assistant Gordon Gray) would then 
hold a smaller, follow-on meeting after the regular NSC to answer the 
President’s more probing questions. 21 

The briefing process during the 1950s had several important advan¬ 
tages from the Agency’s point of view. Among these was the fact that the 
DCI was able to provide intelligence on important matters on a predict¬ 
able schedule in a forum that included not only the President, but also the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretaries of State and 
Defense, and other key players in the foreign policy decision making pro¬ 
cess. The single-most-important advantage of the system, however, was 
that it was unambiguously obvious each week whether the President was 
interested in, and well served by, the intelligence he was receiving. With 
this feedback, CIA was able to be responsive to his needs and those of the 
NSC. Senior Agency officers believed the system worked well. Sheldon 
summed it up by saying, “The Director got used to the procedure and was 
happy with it, and everybody was happy with it; it simply remained that 
way until the next administration.” 

The vast majority of the briefings of the National Security Council 
were provided by the DCI himself. It was clear to all involved, however, 
that Dulles was much more comfortable with political and economic sub¬ 
jects than with scientific and military issues. Quite often the Director 


21 Andrew Goodpaster, interview by the author in Washington, DC, 26 September 1993. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all references to Goodpaster’s observations come from this interview. 


39 



would permit a specialist to brief on such subjects, always designating 
personally the individual he wanted to do the job. Herbert Scoville, Jr., the 
Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence, gave many of the briefings 
on scientific subjects, and the Agency’s nuclear specialist, Herbert Miller, 
distinguished himself with briefings in that specialized field. Amory—the 
Agency’s DDI—from time to time would brief on military matters. 

White House records make clear that attendees at the NSC meetings 
noticed the difference between briefings delivered by the DCI and those 
delivered by the substantive experts. Gray addressed this subject in a 
meeting on 11 January 1961 when he discussed transition matters with 
McGeorge Bundy, representative of President-elect John Kennedy. 
Responding to questions by Bundy about whether the President should 
have daily briefings and, if so, who should deliver them. Gray wrote in his 
memorandum for the record, “I had made a note several months ago to 
discuss with my successor intelligence briefings in the Council. I believe 
that these should be crisper and should be conducted by more junior offic¬ 
ers with a special briefing competence ... I acknowledged to Mr. Bundy 
that this would cause serious personal problems and I was not sure I 
would advise him to tackle it. It was simply a question I left with him.” In 
that same conversation, however, Gray asserted that the practice of having 
the DCI brief the Council every week was “a very useful device.” 22 

Goodpaster recalls that “Eisenhower had a lot of respect for Allen 
Dulles growing out of Dulles’s work during the war. The President 
thought he was very skilled at top-level intelligence—collecting it and 
analyzing it.” Eisenhower would read enough of the Intelligence Commu¬ 
nity’s estimates to get the point and the highlights and, according to Good- 
paster, “felt the formal estimates and papers were the genuine view,” 
meaning they were not politicized. 

But there were some problems. Eisenhower had been struck, for 
example, at how the “bomber gap” of the mid-1950s turned out to be a 
false alarm. When the Intelligence Community and the US military began 
writing of the Soviets’ great progress in missile production during the late 
1950s, “Eisenhower was more than skeptical; he was unconvinced, chal¬ 
lenging repeatedly, ‘what do they base this on?”’ 

According to Goodpaster, Eisenhower believed there were at least 
two reasons why the bomber and missile issues turned into serious politi¬ 
cal problems. One difficulty was that there was a lot of contact between 
elements of the Intelligence Community, particularly the Air Force, and 
Capitol Hill, in which Congress “heard this continual drumbeat about how 
we were falling behind.” The other problem, in Eisenhower’s view, was 
that “there was a lot of self-interest in the intelligence assessments of the 
military services—they were out to promote their own programs.” 


22 Gordon Gray, Memorandum for the Record, 17 January 1961. Eisenhower Library. 


40 



Throughout his presidency, Eisenhower avoided reading daily intelli¬ 
gence reports from any one agency. In fact, he normally read no daily 
reports. Instead, Goodpaster, with the help of the President’s son, Lt. Col. 
John Eisenhower, each morning would review the separate reports from 
CIA, State, Defense, and the Joint Chiefs. They would meld this material 
into one early morning oral briefing. In those sessions, Eisenhower occa¬ 
sionally would ask to see a specific raw report or analytic paper, or task 
additional work. 

Agency veterans recall that Sheldon and Deputy Director for Intelli¬ 
gence Loftus Becker in early March 1953 did discuss the idea of produc¬ 
ing a brief, all-source, daily current intelligence publication exclusively 
for the President. As the Agency came to understand Eisenhower’s prefer¬ 
ences, however, this idea was never followed up. In any event, no such 
publication was actually produced until the Kennedy administration. One 
innovation that was begun in the early Eisenhower years and continued 
throughout his administration was the practice of cabling a daily intelli¬ 
gence report to the President while he was traveling abroad. That practice 
has continued to the present. 


Briefing Governor Stevenson in 1952 

During the 1952 presidential campaign, it proved considerably easier 
to arrange briefings of Govenor Adlai Stevenson than it was to arrange the 
briefings of Eisenhower. For a start, the Governor accepted President Tru¬ 
man’s invitation to lunch and an initial round of discussions on 19 August 
at the White House. Thereafter, he was briefed every two to three weeks 
by the CIA at the Governor’s Mansion in Springfield, Illinois. Those ses¬ 
sions took place on 30 August, 15 September, and 1 and 20 October. 

In the initial division of labor, it was decided that Davidson would 
travel to Springfield to brief Stevenson. The plan had been for him to brief 
both candidates, but as luck would have it they requested their first brief¬ 
ing on the same day. The material Davidson took to Illinois was almost 
exactly the same as that provided Eisenhower. The exception—a distinc¬ 
tion not observed in subsequent years—was that Eisenhower received 
material that included information derived from communications intelli¬ 
gence. Stevenson lacked experience with this sensitive material and did 
not receive it. 

Stevenson was an even more gracious host and careful reader than 
Eisenhower. During their Saturday afternoon sessions, he invariably 
offered his CIA visitor refreshments and had numerous questions and 
comments about the material he read. It was clear from the outset that 
Stevenson had the background and the intellect to take full advantage of 


41 



the intelligence the Agency was providing. Thinking back on the briefings 
more than four decades later, Davidson still commented with awe, “I was 
impressed with the questions he asked. He was well ahead of all of us.” 

Of the many substantive issues that arose during the intelligence 
briefings in 1952, the single one in which Stevenson was most interested 
was Iran. Mohammed Mossadeq had become Prime Minister in April 
1951, and shortly thereafter he had secured passage of a law nationalizing 
the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. In the succeeding months, relations 
between Iran and the United Kingdom steadily worsened and approached 
the crisis point during the fall of 1952. Diplomatic relations were severed 
in October. 

The United Kingdom was concerned about oil, prestige, and com¬ 
pensation, and the United States was worried that Mossadeq might be 
deposed by the Tudeh (Communist) Party. Stevenson, like Eisenhower, 
wanted to follow the situation very carefully. Fortunately for the Agency, 
it was not until after the election that serious discussions began between 
the United States and the United Kingdom about a covert action program 
to remove Mossadeq. Whether to brief a presidential candidate on a covert 
action program as important as the one that was implemented in Iran the 
following year was a question that did not arise. 

Supplementing the briefings he received during the 1952 campaign, 
Stevenson asked a number of questions to which the Agency responded 
with written memorandums. In one case, for example, DCI Smith person¬ 
ally sent a memorandum to the Governor analyzing Josef Stalin’s address 
to the 19th Communist Party Congress, held on 15 October. In addition to 
a factual account of the points Stalin had made, Smith included an analy¬ 
sis that comes across in retrospect as a policy lecture to the candidate. The 
memorandum concluded with the observation that, “It is extremely 
unwise to underestimate the importance of any of Stalin’s statements, 
although sometimes it is not as easy as in the present instance to highlight 
their actual meaning. The significance of the above is unmistakable.” 23 


The Challenger Briefed Again in 1956 

During the 1956 presidential campaign. President Eisenhower con¬ 
tinued to receive routine intelligence briefings at NSC meetings just as he 
had for the previous four years. Without hesitation, Eisenhower autho¬ 
rized the resumption of support to Stevenson during the 1956 campaign 
along the lines of the briefings he and the Governor had received four 
years earlier. 

23 Walter Bedell Smith, Memorandum for Governor Stevenson, 16 October 1952. 


42 



The responsibility for keeping Stevenson informed in 1956 fell pri¬ 
marily to the Agency’s Deputy Director of Current Intelligence, Knight 
McMahan. This time the logistics of the briefings were not as simple as 
they had been in 1952 when the candidate worked out of one location in 
Springfield. McMahan briefed Stevenson on 10 September at the Biltmore 
Hotel in New York City, on 17 September and 1 October at the Sheraton 
Park Hotel in Washington, and on 29 October in Boston. McMahan con¬ 
ducted these briefings alone, except that on 17 September in Washington 
he was joined by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Gen. 
Charles Cabell. 

Like his predecessor four years earlier, McMahan observed, “One 
could not help being impressed with Stevenson; he was a very informed 
man, but what he read brought him up to date and included things he 
didn’t know anything about.” 24 Much of the information provided Steven¬ 
son in 1956 addressed the crisis in Hungary. Beyond that issue, the Gover¬ 
nor studied very carefully material presented to him on Soviet 
disarmament policy. He was also interested in developments in India and 
in the warming relationship between India and China. He had questions 
on the Sino-Burmese relationship, developments in Malaysia and Sin¬ 
gapore, the disputed islands off the China coast, and Russia’s threatening 
activities in the vicinity of Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands. 

Stevenson’s interests in Hungary and the Asian issues, however, 
were secondary to his primary concern, which was the developing Suez 
crisis, caused by Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser’s refusal to 
allow Israeli shipping access to the Canal, in violation of longstanding 
agreements. Agency memorandums for the record show that during the 
first three briefings Stevenson asked a number of questions about the Suez 
situation. 25 He cross-examined McMahan closely on such details as the 
convention of 1888 that governed Canal operations, Israeli shipping, 
developments in the UN, the attitudes of the nonpermanent members of 
the Security Council, possible solutions to the controversy, the status of 
international funding for Nasser’s Aswan Dam project, and the failure of 
Britain’s blue-ribbon negotiating mission. As the crisis continued to build, 
Stevenson probed the legal aspects of Nasser’s position and the Egyptian 
leader’s ability to maintain his government against expected economic 
sanctions. And he was interested in regional aspects of the problem, 
including tensions between Israel and Jordan and the buildup of British 
forces on Cyprus. 


24 Knight McMahan, interview by the author in Hanover, New Hampshire, 18 April 1993. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all references to McMahan’s briefings of Stevenson come from this inter¬ 
view. 

25 McMahan drafted Memorandums for the Record following his first three sessions with Steven¬ 
son, dated 12 September, 18 September, and 2 October 1956. No record is available of his fourth 
session, held on 29 October in Boston. 


43 



On 29 October, McMahan, in his own words, was “caught in the 
worst situation possible for an intelligence briefer: briefing Stevenson in 
Boston on the day Israel attacked Egypt.” McMahan had taken the train 
from Washington to Boston the previous day while the interagency 
“Watch Committee” was reviewing newly available intelligence confirm¬ 
ing that Israel, with British and French support, was completing its mobi¬ 
lization and would attack Egypt. Because the evidence came from 
intercepted communications, this sensitive material was not included in 
the written briefing materials prepared for Stevenson. Instead, McMahan 
intended to handle this breaking story orally. 

To McMahan’s chagrin and embarrassment, he had no more than set¬ 
tled into a chair to begin his briefing of Stevenson when one of the Gover¬ 
nor’s aides burst in to inform him that the press was reporting that Israel 
had attacked. McMahan had not yet said anything. In 1993, McMahan 
still remembered this encounter clearly, recalling, “Stevenson took the 
news in stride, surprised that he had heard it first from the media rather 
than from us. But he reacted with consternation and concern.” Stevenson 
was more gracious than his running mate, Senator Estes Kefauver. 
According to McMahan, “Kefauver (who was briefed separately) gave me 
a very hard time—he couldn’t believe that the French and the British had 
shut us out of the planning process.” 26 

Looking back on the Agency’s exchanges with Stevenson in 1956, it 
is clear that he asked the right probing questions concerning the Suez cri¬ 
sis as it unfolded. He wanted to know not only about the situation in 
Egypt but also about developments in Israel, Jordan, and Cyprus that were 
key to understanding the intentions of the parties involved. McMahan dis¬ 
cussed with Stevenson all aspects of the intelligence reporting but was not 
at liberty to review with Stevenson the politics of intelligence collection 
and policy support that had been unfolding as well. Agency officers had 
noted, for example, that Secretary of State Dulles gave the impression that 
he did not want to receive detailed information regarding the UK buildup 
on Cyprus lest the knowledge of the US Government, accompanied by its 
silence, represent approval. Particularly in the early stages of the crisis, 
there had been a clear assumption by key policymakers that Israel and its 
backers, knowing of Eisenhower’s opposition to a military move, would 
somehow hold back. 

In fact, the US Intelligence Community was unaware of all—and did 
not report on some—of the details of the Israeli, French, and British coop¬ 
eration. The increase in tensions had been well documented in the intelli¬ 
gence reporting. Clear warnings of coming hostilities, however, were 

26 Memorandums for the Record, dated 1 and 8 October 1956, are available for only two early 
briefings of Kefauver. 


44 



issued only a week ahead. When the attack occurred, the President and the 
Democratic candidates were furious with the European allies and less than 
proud of their own handling of the crisis. 

From the Agency’s point of view, thanks to the problems with the 
Suez crisis, the briefings for Stevenson in 1956 ended on an awkward 
note. In all other respects, however, the sessions with Stevenson and 
Kefauver were a great success. Stevenson personally wrote Acting DCI 
Cabell to thank him for the briefings provided by McMahan, observing 
that they were “excellent and I found him very well informed.” 27 

Agency officers who met with Stevenson during his two campaigns 
came away deeply impressed with his knowledge of foreign affairs and 
his interest in and appreciation of the intelligence product. More than that, 
it had been a great personal pleasure to deal with him. McMahan recalls, 
“He was a very courteous, polite man. I remember thinking it was a bless¬ 
ing he was not elected, in light of the public and personal attacks to which 
our presidents are subjected.” 

21 Adlai Stevenson letter to C. P. Cabell, 11 September 1956. 


45 




Chapter 3 


Into Politics With Kennedy and Johnson 


The CIA’s early relationship with presidential candidate John 
Kennedy could hardly have been more different from the one it had estab¬ 
lished eight years earlier with General Eisenhower. In 1952, the Agency’s 
briefings in the preelection period had been undertaken by working-level 
officers who, for the most part, delivered current intelligence summaries 
in written form. With few exceptions, the reports and analyses offered by 
the briefers steered clear of policy issues. In 1960, by contrast, the brief¬ 
ings were handled personally by the Director of Central Intelligence, 
Allen Dulles, and included extended discussions of sensitive matters. 

In 1960, the CIA and its programs for the first time became involved 
in the political campaign, sometimes within public view and sometimes 
behind the scenes. Issues arose relating to the need for, and the protection 
of, the US Government’s intelligence capabilities, specific intelligence 
collection programs such as the U-2 aircraft overflights, and substantive 
analytic findings related to Soviet economic and strategic capabilities. 
Charges were made regarding the allegedly selective use of intelligence 
information by the White House and the Agency. And, for the first time, 
CIA faced the question of what obligation it might have to brief a presi¬ 
dential candidate on a major covert action program. 


The Presidential Debates 

Many of these issues were on display during the presidential debates, 
held for the first time in 1960. The first debate, in Chicago on 26 Septem¬ 
ber, focused exclusively on domestic issues, but in the second debate, on 
7 October in Washington, Republican candidate Richard Nixon attacked 
Senator Kennedy’s earlier statement that the United States should have 
apologized to the Soviets for the incident in which Francis Gary Powers’ 
U-2 aircraft was downed over the USSR during a CIA reconnaissance 
mission. “We all remember Pearl Harbor,” the Vice President began. “We 


47 



lost 3,000 American lives. We cannot afford an intelligence gap. And I 
just want to make my position absolutely clear with regard to getting 
intelligence information. I don't intend to see to it that the United States is 
ever in a position where, while we are negotiating with the Soviet Union, 
that we discontinue our intelligence effort, and I don’t intend ever to 
express regrets to Mr. Khrushchev or anybody else. ...’ M 

In the third debate on 13 October, featuring Kennedy from New York 
and Nixon from Los Angeles, Kennedy cited the DCI as his authority for 
an invidious comparison of US and Soviet achievements: “The economic 
growth of the Soviet Union is greater than ours. Mr. Dulles has suggested 
it is from two to three times as great as ours.” 1 2 In that debate and in the 
fourth and final encounter in New York on 21 October, Kennedy pursued 
the theme that the Soviets were surpassing the United States economically 
and militarily, a topic that headed the list of CIA intelligence production 
priorities. 

Perhaps the most crucial foreign policy issue raised in the 1960 
debates, which derived directly from US intelligence analyses, was the 
alleged gap between US and Soviet intercontinental missile production. 
Kennedy charged that the Soviets had “made a breakthrough in missiles, 
and by ‘61-2-3 they will be outnumbering us in missiles. I’m not as confi¬ 
dent as he (Nixon) is that we will be the strongest military power by 
1963.” Kennedy added, “I believe the Soviet Union is first in outer space. 
We have made more shots but the size of their rocket thrust and all the 
rest. You yourself said to Khrushchev, you may be ahead of us in rocket 
thrust but we’re ahead of you in color television, in your famous discus¬ 
sion in the kitchen. I think that color television is not as important as 
rocket thrust.” 3 

During three of the debates, Nixon attacked Kennedy for his lack of 
willingness to defend Quemoy and Matsu, the small Nationalist-held 
islands off the coast of Communist China. The extensive discussion of the 
Quemoy-Matsu issue did not create any direct problem for the CIA, but it 
led directly to a controversial dispute between the candidates over policy 
toward Cuba, where a popular revolution had established a Soviet- 
supported Communist government. The politically charged clash had a 
number of repercussions in the White House and at the CIA. 

Kennedy adviser Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. later described the relation¬ 
ship of these China and Cuba issues and the sequence of events in his 
memoir of the Kennedy administration, A Thousand Days: “The Kennedy 
staff, seeking to take the offensive after his supposed soft position on 
Quemoy and Matsu, put out the provocative statement about strengthening 


1 The New York Times , 8 October 1960, p. 10. 

2 The New York Times , 14 October 1960, p. 21. 

3 The New York Times , 22 October 1960, pp. 8, 9. 


48 



the Cuban fighters for freedom.” 4 The controversial press release, crafted 
late one evening in the Biltmore Hotel in New York City by speechwriter 
Richard Goodwin, said “We must attempt to strengthen the non-Batista, 
democratic, anti-Castro forces in exile, and in Cuba itself, who offer even¬ 
tual hope of overthrowing Castro.” According to Goodwin, the policy 
statement was not shown to the sleeping Kennedy because of the late hour; 
it was the only public statement of the campaign not approved by the can¬ 
didate. 5 

The ill-considered statement on Cuba received wide press play and 
was immediately attacked. The New York Times the next day ran the story 
as the lead item on the front page with the headline: “Kennedy Asks Aid 
for Cuban Rebels to Defeat Castro, Urges Support of Exiles and Fighters 
for Freedom.” James Reston wrote in the Times that “Senator Kennedy 
(has) made what is probably his worst blunder of the campaign.” 6 

Coming the day before the fourth presidential debate, the statement 
from the Kennedy camp put Nixon in what he found to be an extraordinar¬ 
ily awkward position. Many years later Nixon wrote in his memoirs, “I 
knew that Kennedy had received a CIA briefing on the administration’s 
Cuba policy and assumed that he knew, as I did, that a plan to aid the 
Cuban exiles was already under way on a top secret basis. His statement 
jeopardized the project, which could succeed only if it were supported and 
implemented secretly.” 7 

Throughout the campaign the two candidates had engaged in a spir¬ 
ited exchange about whether the Eisenhower administration had “lost” 
Cuba, and Nixon knew that the issue would be revived in the final debate, 
which was to be devoted solely to foreign affairs. Nixon has written that 
to protect the security of the planned operation he “had no choice but to 
take a completely opposite stand and attack Kennedy’s advocacy of open 
intervention.” And he did attack, saying, “I think that Senator Kennedy’s 
policies and recommendations for the handling of the Castro regime are 
probably the most dangerously irresponsible recommendations that he has 
made during the course of this campaign.” 8 

Former Kennedy advisers have underscored over the years that the 
statement on Cuba was released without Kennedy’s knowledge by staffers 
ignorant of the covert action planning under way at the time and was 
crafted solely to ensure that Kennedy would not again be put on the defen¬ 
sive about Communist expansionism. These same advisers differ among 
themselves, however, on the key question of whether Kennedy himself 
knew of the covert action plans. Kennedy speechwriter Theodore 


4 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965), p. 225. 

5 Richard Goodwin, Remembering America (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1988), p. 125. 

6 The New York Times , 23 October 1960, p. E10. 

7 Richard Nixon, The Memoirs of Richard Nixon (New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1978), p. 220. 

8 The New York Times , 22 October 1960, p. 9. 


49 



Sorensen said in 1993, “I am certain that at the time of the debates 
Kennedy had no knowledge of the planned operation. His reference to 
more assertive action regarding Cuba was put in by one of my assistants 
to give him something to say.” 9 

The assistant was Richard Goodwin, whose memory is quite differ¬ 
ent. Goodwin asserts that, “As a presidential candidate, he (Kennedy) had 
received secret briefings by the CIA, some of which revealed that we were 
training a force of Cuban exiles for a possible invasion of the Cuban 
mainland.” 10 Goodwin and Sorensen have both made clear that they were 
not in attendance at any CIA briefings. 

The US Government’s planning for a covert action program intended 
to undermine Castro had been approved by President Eisenhower in 
March 1960 and was in progress throughout the period of the presidential 
campaign. The question of when and to what extent Kennedy—or any 
presidential candidate—would be informed of the covert action delibera¬ 
tions was important to CIA because it raised the delicate question of 
informing individuals outside the normally restricted circle in CIA, the 
Congress, and the executive branch. 

In 1960 this was uncharted territory. In subsequent presidential cam¬ 
paign years, the Agency’s practice came to be one of delaying briefings 
even on established covert action programs, as well as on sensitive techni¬ 
cal and human-source collection programs, until after the election had 
determined who would be president. This meant denying such briefings to 
presidential candidates, creating the risk that they would inadvertently 
make statements during the campaign that might embarrass themselves 
and the Agency, or—more important—complicate the future execution of 
US foreign policy. 

Well before the Cuba liberation issue came to a head in October, the 
outgoing Eisenhower administration had realized that covert action plan¬ 
ning on Cuba could be a political bombshell. Following one of Allen 
Dulles’s briefings of the National Security Council in early August, for 
example, the Vice President pulled the DCI aside to ask him whether 
Kennedy and his running mate, Senator Lyndon Johnson, were being pro¬ 
vided information on covert action projects, specifically those related to 
Cuba. Dulles gave a carefully crafted answer to the effect that Kennedy 
was being told a little but not too much. According to former Agency offi¬ 
cials familiar with the exchange, Nixon reacted strongly to Dulles’s reply, 
saying, “Don’t tell him anything. That could be dangerous.” 11 


9 Theodore Sorensen, telephone interview with the author, 19 May 1993. Unless otherwise indi¬ 
cated, all references to Sorensen’s comments come from this interview. 

10 Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 125. 

11 Knight McMahan, interview with the author in Hanover, New Hampshire, 18 April 1993. 


50 




Senator John F. Kennedy and DCI Allen Dulles prepare to meet the press at Hyan- 
nisport following Dulles's briefing of the presidential candidate. 


In his own account of these events, published in 1962, Nixon charged 
that Kennedy, before the election of 1960, had knowledge of covert action 
planning “for the eventual purpose of supporting an invasion of Cuba 
itself.” 12 This charge prompted a formal press release from the White 
House on 20 March 1962 denying that Kennedy had been told of any 
plans for “supporting an invasion of Cuba” before the election. The White 


12 Richard Nixon, Six Crises (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1962), p. 354. 


51 













House denial was backed up by Dulles, by then a former DCI, who 
explained that Nixon’s comments were apparently based on a misunder¬ 
standing of what was included in the briefings he had given Kennedy. 


Preelection Briefings: What Really Was Discussed? 

As early as 30 March 1960, Edward P. Morgan of the American 
Broadcasting Company used the occasion of a presidential press confer¬ 
ence to ask Eisenhower if the presidential nominees to be selected in the 
summer would be given high-level intelligence briefings. At that early 
date the DCI had not yet raised the subject with the President, but Eisen¬ 
hower did not hesitate, saying “We always do that. They did it for me in 
1952 and I did it in ‘56, as quick as the nominees are named they begin to 
get it.” 13 Indeed, on 18 July, Eisenhower sent telegrams to the Democratic 
nominees offering them briefings by the CIA. Undoubtedly recalling his 
own difficult exchange with President Truman eight years earlier, Eisen¬ 
hower included in his telegram a paragraph saying, “Because of the secret 
character of the information that would be furnished you, it would be 
exclusively for your personal knowledge. Otherwise, however, the receipt 
of such information would impose no restriction on full and free discus¬ 
sion.” 14 

Senator John F. Kennedy, the Democratic presidential nominee, 
immediately accepted the offer, and the first intelligence briefing was held 
five days later, on Saturday 23 July. The briefing was conducted at 
Kennedy’s vacation home in Hyannisport, Massachusetts, by the DCI 
alone in a session that lasted approximately two and a quarter hours. 
Dulles then briefed Senator Lyndon Johnson, the vice-presidential nomi¬ 
nee, at his ranch in Texas on 28 July. 

In that first round of briefings, the DCI put heavy emphasis on Soviet 
issues, including Soviet progress in strategic delivery capabilities, mis¬ 
siles, and bombers, and discussed the nuclear testing issue. He also 
reviewed Soviet statements on Berlin and Sino-Soviet cooperation. Dulles 
went over the latest intelligence on the Taiwan Straits situation; Middle 
East politics, particularly events in Iran; France’s anticolonial problems in 
Algeria and Belgium’s in the Congo; and Cuba. The Johnson briefing dif¬ 
fered from that of Kennedy only because the Texas Senator was also inter¬ 
ested in discussing Mexico. 15 

13 Dwight Eisenhower, in comments recorded by Allen Dulles, Memorandum for the President, 

9 July 1960. 

14 Dwight Eisenhower telegrams to John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson, Public Papers of the 
Presidents , 1960, p. 582. 

15 Allen Dulles, Memorandum for the President, 3 August 1960. 


52 



Dulles recorded that both wanted to know what developments might 
arise during the campaign, especially in Berlin, Cuba, and the Congo. 
Kennedy asked Dulles’s opinion about the likelihood of an early Chinese 
attack on the offshore islands in the Taiwan Straits and inquired about the 
status of the conference on limiting nuclear testing. Johnson, in addition 
to his interest in Mexican and Caribbean matters, asked about Soviet mis¬ 
sile developments, reflecting his position as Chairman of the Senate Pre¬ 
paredness Committee. 

At the conclusion of the first briefing, Kennedy stated that in future 
briefings he wanted the DCI to cover potential trouble spots all around the 
world, but subsequent scheduling difficulties delayed the next (and, as it 
turned out, the last) preelection briefing session almost two months. On 17 
September, a Saturday night, Dulles was dining with friends in George¬ 
town when he was surprised by a telephone call from a member of the 
Kennedy staff at about 9 p.m. Could the DCI meet with the Senator on 
Monday morning, 19 September, at the Kennedy home in Georgetown? 16 

When the DCI arrived with his hastily prepared briefing package, he 
found Kennedy engaged in discussion with Senator Albert Gore, Sr., 
while various other people, including Prince Sadruddin Khan, uncle of the 
Aga Khan, waited their turns. When the other visitors had departed, the 
DCI had approximately 30 minutes with Kennedy to give him an update 
on world trouble spots. Dulles’s memorandum for the record notes that he 
discussed Cuba, the Congo, Berlin, Laos, Jordan, Syria, the Sino-Soviet 
dispute, and the Soviet space program. 

During this second briefing Kennedy was interested in learning what 
Khrushchev’s objectives would be in his coming visit to the UN and what 
the Agency believed the Soviet leader was likely to say or do. The Senator 
said he wanted to be alerted to any critical areas that CIA thought might 
blow up over the next six or seven weeks before the election, but Dulles 
apparently took no specific action at the time to meet this request. 

More than a month later, with the election looming, Robert Kennedy 
contacted Acting DCI Gen. Charles Cabell to repeat the request for infor¬ 
mation on possible trouble spots. This brought a response within 24 hours. 
On 2 November, Cabell traveled to California, where Kennedy was cam¬ 
paigning, to deliver a memorandum that discussed a number of potentially 
troublesome developments. These included the Soviets’ October Revolu¬ 
tion anniversary, Sino-Soviet developments, tensions in Berlin and the 
Taiwan Straits, possible Chinese nuclear tests, a Soviet space spectacular, 
the French-Algerian impasse, events in Southeast Asia, King Hussein’s 
delicate position in the Middle East, the unsettled situation in the Congo, 
and possible action by Cuba against Guantanamo Naval Base. In this 


16 Allen Dulles, Memorandum for the Record, 21 September 1960. 


53 



review of explosive international situations, the Agency cautioned that, in 
fact, “we do not estimate any of them are likely to occur prior to 
8 November.” 17 

A search of CIA records has failed to confirm that Dulles briefed 
Kennedy on the status of Cuban covert action planning in either of their 
two sessions held before the election in 1960. The DCFs memorandums 
recording the sessions in July and September mention Cuba only as one of 
many trouble spots around the world. Taken alone, this would suggest that 
their discussion concerned what was going on in Cuba rather than what 
the United States might be planning to do about it. 

An internal CIA memorandum of 15 November 1960 discussing an 
anticipated postelection briefing mentions that “The following draft mate¬ 
rial is much more detailed and operational than that prepared for the can¬ 
didates in July.” 18 This formulation suggests that the message on Cuba 
Dulles conveyed in July was at least a bit “operational,” even if not 
detailed. Such an inference would be consistent with Dulles’s answer to 
Nixon’s question in early August that he had told Kennedy, in effect, a lit¬ 
tle but not too much. 

When Dulles met with Kennedy in July (their only meeting before 
the exchange between Dulles and Nixon in early August), the planning on 
Cuba and the limited operational activities already launched related 
almost entirely to propaganda and political action. Paramilitary planning 
at that point envisaged the deployment of extremely small, two- or three- 
man guerrilla units. Contingency planning within the Agency for more 
forceful action intensified over the next several months, but the idea of a 
conventional assault by Cuban exile forces was not put before the inter¬ 
agency Special Group until 3 November and was rejected. 


The Missile Gap 

In the two preelection briefings in 1960, the most challenging issue 
the DCI is known to have discussed at length was that of Soviet strategic 
capabilities. Without intending to do so, Dulles had created a considerable 
political problem for himself by giving a number of public speeches in 
which he asserted that Soviet capabilities were growing and raised the 
question of what the US response ought to be. He had highlighted the 
USSR’s progress in basic science, in training large numbers of scientists, 
and its research and development efforts as well as its demonstrated 
achievements in building spacecraft and missiles. 


17 CIA, untitled list of significant developments in response to Kennedy’s request; no date. 

18 CIA, “Draft Cuban Operational Briefing: President-Elect,” 15 November 1960. 


54 



In early 1960 the United States was aware of the Soviet missile 
flights from the Tyuratam test site, but did not know with certainty if any 
operational Soviet missiles had been deployed. In the search for deployed 
missiles, among other priority missions, U-2 aircraft had been flown over 
the Soviet Union since July 1956. On 1 May 1960, Gary Powers was shot 
down. In the United States, the West Virginia primary election campaign 
was at its peak; there was no doubt that the U-2 incident would figure in 
the impending general election campaign. 

In his formal memorandums for the record, Dulles did not provide 
much detail regarding exchanges he may have had with Kennedy about 
the U-2 shootdown. He did note that the Senator, in the September brief¬ 
ing, had asked him about a book by Maj. Gen. John Medaris, entitled 
Countdown for Decision. The Medaris book had criticized the US govern¬ 
ment for its failure to replace the U-2 with a more sophisticated aircraft or 
an invulnerable satellite reconnaissance system. 

In a memorandum sent to Gen. Andrew Goodpaster, the staff secre¬ 
tary of the White House, on 25 September, Dulles recorded that Kennedy 
and Johnson had separately inquired about intelligence techniques or 
capabilities to replace the U-2. 19 Dulles was clearly uneasy about the 
security hazards in these questions and noted that he had replied only in a 
general way, indicating that research and development work on advanced 
aircraft and satellites was progressing “with reasonably satisfactory pros¬ 
pects.” Dulles added, “Unless I hear from you to the contrary, I shall not 
give any more detailed briefings on this subject.” In fact, the first US sat¬ 
ellite reconnaissance system was being used in an experimental way in the 
late summer of 1960; it was launched in August. Significant amounts of 
analytically useful imagery did not become available from the new system 
until December 1960, after the election. 

During the preelection period, Dulles was also in an awkward posi¬ 
tion owing to a minor dispute or misunderstanding between the White 
House and the Kennedy team about whether the Senator should receive a 
briefing from Secretary of Defense Thomas Gates. During the preelection 
period, in the interest of fairness to each candidate, Eisenhower wanted 
Kennedy to receive general overview briefings on the world situation 
from the CIA, and these were being provided. On the other hand, the Pres¬ 
ident initially declined the Kennedy team’s request that he receive a brief¬ 
ing from the Secretary of Defense. By the end of August, however, the 
White House had changed its mind and approved a briefing by Gates. 

Dulles had weighed in with the White House on at least two occa¬ 
sions, including once with Eisenhower personally, to urge that Gates brief 
Kennedy. The DCI knew that he would be courting political trouble if he 

19 Allen Dulles, Memorandum for Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, 25 September 1960. 


55 



answered what had been Kennedy’s first question: “Where do we our¬ 
selves stand in the missile race?” As he had done on innumerable occa¬ 
sions in Congressional appearances, Dulles insisted that the Defense 
Department “was the competent authority on this question.” 

The White House was obviously uneasy that Kennedy would hear 
several versions of the story concerning Soviet strategic capabilities. 
Democrats on the Preparedness Committee, led by the uniquely well- 
informed Senator Stuart Symington, were attacking the White House with 
claims that the Soviets were outdistancing the United States. Gates had 
been trying to play down the importance of the issue, but the Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs, Air Force Gen. Nathan Twining, was emphasizing the 
more alarmist views of the Air Force. As DCI, Dulles had been charged 
with pulling together a collective view of this intractable problem of col¬ 
lection and analysis, but everyone, including Eisenhower, knew the 
Agency did not have the detailed technical intelligence or the bureaucratic 
clout to referee the contentious issue. 20 

In responding to Kennedy’s questions about Soviet strategic capabili¬ 
ties, Dulles did not improvise. On this critical and technical subject he 
stuck very closely to the findings laid out in numerous National Intelli¬ 
gence Estimates. During the period from 1957 to 1960, the Intelligence 
Community published from two to four Estimates annually evaluating 
Soviet progress on space and ballistic missile programs. In December 
1957, the Community had published one of its most ominous Estimates, 
referring to the Soviets’ “crash program.” That Estimate had projected 
that the USSR sometime during calendar year 1959 would probably have 
its first operational capability with 10 prototype ICBMs. 21 The same Esti¬ 
mate projected that the Soviet Union probably would have “an operational 
capability with 100 ICBMs about one year after its first operational capa¬ 
bility date, and with 500 ICBMs two, or at most, three years [that is, 1963] 
after first operational capability date.” 

By early 1960, the Community as a whole was using somewhat more 
moderate language to discuss probable Soviet missile capabilities, but, 
nevertheless, early that year three separate Estimates were published 
whose findings were sufficiently alarmist to fuel the missile gap debate. 
The bottom line of an Estimate published in February was especially 
important because it came as close as the US Intelligence Community 
ever did to a net assessment. The Estimate stated, “Our analysis leads us 
to believe that if the US military posture develops as presently planned, 
the USSR will in 1961 have its most favorable opportunity to gain a 


20 Andrew Goodpaster, interview by the author in Washington, DC, 26 September 1993. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all references to Goodpaster’s observations come from this interview. 

21 Special National Intelligence Estimate No. 11-10-57, “The Soviet ICBM Program - Conclu¬ 
sions ,” 10 December 1957, pp. 1,2. 


56 



decided military, political, and psychological advantage over the United 
States by the rapid deployment of operational ICBMs.” 22 The February 
Estimate went on to observe that the Soviet ICBM program did not appear 
to be a crash program but was designed to provide a substantial ICBM 
capability at an early date. A separate Estimate, also published in Febru¬ 
ary, stated flatly: “The single-most-important development affecting the 
structure of Soviet military power during the period of this estimate will 
be the buildup of an ICBM force. Long-range missiles will enable the 
USSR to overcome its inferiority to the United States in nuclear strategic 
attack capability, as it was unable to do with bomber aircraft.” 23 

In terms of the political debate on the issue, an even larger problem 
was posed by the Air Force conclusion that leaders of the Soviet Union 
were endeavoring to attain a decisive military superiority over the United 
States. This superiority, the Air Force assessed, would enable the USSR 
“to launch such devastating attacks against the United States that at the 
cost of acceptable levels of damage to themselves, the United States as a 
world power would cease to exist.” This extremely ominous Air Force 
view was repeated in several National Intelligence Estimates—often 
referred to inaccurately as CIA products—published during the period. It 
was shared widely with the Congress and leaked to the press. 

The findings of these Intelligence Community Estimates were having 
a significant impact on the White House, the Congress, and the voters. In 
the words of Howard Stoertz, a senior CIA officer who often accompanied 
Dulles to his briefings of the Congress and the NSC, “Our findings were 
sufficiently scary that those who wanted a new administration to be 
elected were finding support in our Estimates.” 24 

One interesting index of the impact of this intelligence was provided 
by former President (and Congressman) Gerald Ford in September 1993. 
Responding to an open-ended question about whether he remembered 
occasions when intelligence findings had created particular policy dilem¬ 
mas, Ford volunteered, “Mostly I remember the period from 1953 to 1964 
when I was on the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee that provided 
the CIA’s budget. Allen Dulles and others from the CIA would come in 
and paint the most scary picture possible about what the Soviet Union 
would do to us. We were going to be second rate; the Soviets were going 
to be Number One. I didn’t believe all that propaganda.” 25 


22 National Intelligence Estimate No. 11-8-59, “Soviet Capabilities for Strategic Attack through 
Mid-1964,” 9 February 1960, p. 2. 

23 National Intelligence Estimate No. 11-4-59, “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 
1959-1964,” 9 February 1960, p.4. 

24 Howard Stoertz, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 27 September 1993. 

25 Gerald Ford, interview by the author in Beaver Creek, Colorado, 8 September 1993. 


57 



The same material that was briefed to the House had been provided 
to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and, therefore, to one of its 
most prominent junior members, John Kennedy. Kennedy made effective 
use of this intelligence in his presidential campaign, to the discomfort of 
the CIA, the White House, and Vice President Nixon—the Republican 
candidate. Goodpaster remembers that the politics of the issue became 
sufficiently awkward that Eisenhower sent him to the Agency to meet per¬ 
sonally with Dulles and Symington to get to the bottom of the problem. 
Howard Stoertz remembers well that “Allen Dulles had us prepare a chart 
to prove we had not cooked the books for the election.” 


Postelection Briefing on Cuba 

Once Kennedy had won the election, the CIA felt free to provide him 
a systematic briefing on the Agency’s covert action programs worldwide, 
and—most important—to inform him in detail about the deliberations 
under way on Cuba. This took place at the Kennedy residence in Palm 
Beach, Florida, on 18 November, some 10 days after the vote. Reflecting 
the importance and sensitivity of the subject, there were two high-level 
briefers: Dulles, whom Kennedy had announced he would keep on as DCI 
the day following the election (along with FBI Director Hoover, his first 
appointments); and Richard Bissell, the Agency’s Deputy Director for 
Plans (Operations). Like Dulles, Bissell knew Kennedy from the Wash¬ 
ington social scene and, in his own case, from a shared New England 
background. 

In discussing the briefing more than 30 years later, Bissell recalled 
that “Allen and I felt great pressure to inform the new President. The 
(Cuba) operation had acquired a considerable momentum and could not 
just be turned off and on. We settled outside on the terrace at a table and I 
gave him an abbreviated but fairly complete briefing on the state of the 
operation. I went on at least 30 minutes, maybe 45. I was fairly detailed in 
outlining the plan of what we hoped would happen.” 26 

A review of the briefing papers used by Dulles and Bissell suggests 
that they gave Kennedy a careful overview of the Cuba plans as they 
existed in mid-November 1960. Their review included an explanation of 
the Presidential authorization, signed by Eisenhower on 17 March, for the 
Agency to undertake planning. The briefing described the political action 
initiatives already under way in which the Agency was providing support 
to various anti-Castro groups and individuals inside and outside Cuba. 


26 Richard Bissell, interview by the author in Farmington, Connecticut, 17 April 1993. 


58 



They described the propaganda operation in place at the time, including 
the preparation of publications and radiobroadcasts aimed at weakening 
Castro’s rule. These included broadcasts from Swan Island, which years 
later came to play a prominent role in the Agency’s activities against the 
Sandinista government in Nicaragua. 

The briefing of 18 November occurred in the midst of a fundamental 
review, back in Washington, of the scope of the paramilitary aspects of the 
anti-Castro program. At that time, everything was in flux. Nothing had 
been decided, let alone finally approved. In these circumstances, Dulles 
and Bissell planned to brief Kennedy carefully on a range of possible 
paramilitary operations. 

The first option envisaged the development and support of dissident 
groups by the Agency’s Cuban assets to undertake antiregime guerrilla 
action inside Cuba. A group of instructors had been trained who would, in 
time, oversee the instruction of up to 500 additional men, and radio and 
flight training were being provided Cuban pilots. The two briefers were to 
describe all these preparations, as well as the role of a few small groups 
already placed inside Cuba and the airdrops of supplies and equipment 
that were sustaining them. 

The potential second phase of the paramilitary plan to be covered by 
the briefers was a combined sea-air assault by trained Cuban exiles coor¬ 
dinated with the guerrilla activity generated on the island. This undertak¬ 
ing would attempt to establish a close-in staging base for future anti- 
Castro military operations. A last phase, should it be needed, would be an 
air assault on the Havana area in support of guerrilla forces in Cuba mov¬ 
ing on the ground into the capital. Mention was to be made of a contin¬ 
gency plan for overt US military intervention that would include the use 
of Agency assets. 

Bissell remembers emphasizing particularly the plans for the possi¬ 
ble movement of exile ground and air forces to Cuba both by sea and by 
air. He recalls that he “put a lot of emphasis on the timing aspects, and the 
numbers (of men and equipment) involved.” Dulles and Bissell intended 
to inform Kennedy that it did not appear that in-country guerrilla actions 
alone would be successful in sparking a successful revolt against the 
regime. It is unclear whether they intended to brief the President-elect of 
the even more pessimistic assessment expressed by some in the Agency 
that even an invading force of exile Cubans would be unsuccessful with¬ 
out direct US involvement. 

Press accounts of the briefing of Kennedy in Palm Beach indicate 
that it went on for two hours and 40 minutes. Bissell remembers that 
throughout the extended session the President-elect “was almost entirely a 
listener—although a very good listener. Kennedy had a number of ques¬ 
tions that grew out of the briefing, but he had no prepared list of questions 
ahead of time.” 


59 



Available CIA records do not suggest that Kennedy volunteered any 
opinion regarding the wisdom, or lack thereof, of the plans presented to 
him. Nothing in the documentation suggests that he either authorized the 
operation or urged restraint. To the contrary, Dulles stated in a memoran¬ 
dum sent to Gen. Maxwell Taylor, the President’s Special Adviser on Mil¬ 
itary Affairs, on 1 June 1961 that “the purpose of the briefing was not to 
solicit the President-elect’s approval or disapproval of the program but 
merely to acquaint him of its existence.” 27 This implies, obviously, that 
Dulles had not previously informed Kennedy of the plans. 

As Bissell put it, “We were in an absolutely untenable position until 
the new President knew what was going on, but we avoided seeking a yea 
or nay.” He added that “Kennedy was favorably interested, but extremely 
careful to avoid a commitment, express or implied. We didn’t get any neg¬ 
ative reaction—I was interested above all in his studious neutrality. Allen 
Dulles and I talked about the Kennedy reaction after the fact. We had the 
same impression—on the whole Kennedy’s attitude was favorable.” This 
shared impression obviously cleared the way for continued Agency plan¬ 
ning for what ultimately became the Bay of Pigs operation. 


Other Covert Programs 

Dulles intended to have the briefing of the President-elect in Palm 
Beach cover worldwide intelligence operations, of which Cuba was only 
one. His records indicate he wanted to establish that the Agency was fully 
supportive of the new President. “We made it clear to him that from this 
time on any information he desired was at his immediate disposal and 
would be willingly given.” 28 In fact, Dulles was also working hard to 
solidify his personal standing with Kennedy. Senior Agency officers 
undoubtedly had mixed feelings when Dulles announced at a special staff 
meeting on 10 November that “all liaison with the new Administration by 
CIA would be conducted by the Director.” 29 

According to handwritten notes prepared by Bissell, he and Dulles 
also were prepared to brief Kennedy on a variety of issues, large and 
small. 30 For example, one planned topic was the question of clearances. 
Although the President would be told that he possessed all clearances 
automatically, he should be advised of what was involved in providing 
special compartmented clearances that would enable his staff to receive 
intercepted communications and other sensitive material. Dulles also 


27 Allen Dulles, Memorandum for Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, 1 June 1961. 

28 Allen Dulles, My Answer on the Bay of Pigs, unpublished draft, October 1965. 

29 Lyman Kirkpatrick, Diary, 10 November 1960. 

30 Richard Bissell, untitled and undated notes for briefing President-elect Kennedy. 


60 



intended to discuss with Kennedy the legal basis for CIA’s worldwide spe¬ 
cial operations. On the substantive side, in addition to Cuba, Dulles was 
prepared to brief Kennedy on operations in Venezuela, the Dominican 
Republic, and elsewhere in Central America. Agency activities in Tibet 
were also a discrete item. 

The majority of the items to be raised did not address specific countries 
or regions. Rather, Dulles planned a thematic discussion of Agency propa¬ 
ganda and political action programs, with illustrative successes from around 
the world. Dulles was primed to provide examples of where the Agency had 
succeeded in reducing the power of Communist parties abroad and in sup¬ 
porting the growth of constructive opposition parties. In a review of what 
was, at that time, still recent history, Dulles intended to inform Kennedy of 
CIA actions related to coups in Guatemala, Laos, and South Vietnam. 

Regarding technical collection, Dulles was undoubtedly relieved to 
be able to discuss with Kennedy more fully the progress that had been 
made with aircraft and satellite systems to replace the U-2. The DCFs 
notes suggest he intended to discuss the existing U-2 program and two 
follow-on programs. One was the SR-71 aircraft, then under development, 
and the other the first imaging satellite, a film-return system. 

Thirty years after the fact, there is no way to know with certainty how 
much of the material Dulles and Bissell prepared was actually discussed 
with Kennedy. Bissell remembers that the bulk of the time he and Dulles 
spent with Kennedy in Palm Beach was used to discuss Cuba. After that dis¬ 
cussion, Bissell remembers that “Allen Dulles and John Kennedy drifted off 
to the end of the terrace and talked for some time about matters having 
nothing to do with Cuba.” Bissell recalls that their conversation lasted at 
least 15 but certainly no more than 30 minutes. When shown several pages 
of his own handwritten notes concerning the issues the two had intended to 
raise, Bissell laughed and asserted that, “Nobody had time to cover every¬ 
thing that is on this list at any time prior to inauguration.” 

Records of the Eisenhower White House suggest that Dulles dis¬ 
cussed, or at least was authorized to discuss, only a narrow agenda with 
the President-elect at the Palm Beach meeting. On 17 November, the day 
before Dulles traveled to Florida, Goodpaster recorded that he had 
informed the President that he had discussed the agenda with the CIA 
Director and with Gen. Wilton Persons, the White House Chief of Staff. 
Goodpaster had informed Dulles that CIA operations were to be disclosed 
to Kennedy only as specifically approved on a case-by-case basis by Pres¬ 
ident Eisenhower. Goodpaster’s memorandum confirms Eisenhower had 
approved Dulles’s plan to inform Kennedy of operations relating to Cuba 
as well as to “certain reconnaissance satellite operations of a covert 
nature.” No other subjects were specifically approved. 31 

31 Andrew Goodpaster, Memorandum for the Record, 17 November 1960. 


61 



Dulles’s notes state not only that Eisenhower authorized the Palm 
Beach briefing but also that the briefing was given at his suggestion and 
that it covered “worldwide intelligence operations.” Bissell recalls that the 
scheduling of the briefing came up rather quickly. To his knowledge, 
Dulles received no guidance or suggestion from the White House on what 
the subject matter should be. 

In discussing the politics of these briefings in 1993, Goodpaster 
remembered clearly the conflicting views the President and others in the 
White House had about them. On the one hand, some of Eisenhower’s 
preelection reservations had evaporated by mid-November. He had issued 
a directive that, because Kennedy was to be the next President, “We must 
help him in any way we can.” On the other hand, Goodpaster also remem¬ 
bers that Eisenhower had some uneasiness about how far Dulles should 
and would go in his discussions. The President believed ongoing delibera¬ 
tions by him and his advisers should remain confidential, and he worried 
about the inherent problems of protecting that confidentiality while at the 
same time briefing Kennedy fully. 

Goodpaster’s records indicate he discussed with the President and 
Senior Staff Assistant Gordon Gray the “special problem” of Dulles’s 
continued attendance at NSC meetings once he had been designated by 
Kennedy to serve in the next administration. Goodpaster informed Dulles 
that while the President wanted him to continue to attend NSC meetings, 
the proceedings of those sessions were not to be disclosed outside the 
NSC room. According to the records, he had the impression “Mr. Dulles 
had not understood that this matter was a delicate one.” In 1993, Good¬ 
paster reiterated that “there was a feeling that all this had to be explained 
pretty carefully to Allen Dulles.” 


The Mystery Briefing of Late November 

A number of books and articles written about the Bay of Pigs contain 
the assertion that Kennedy was informed in detail of the planned opera¬ 
tion and gave his approval in a briefing by Dulles in late November 1960. 
A review of the chronology of these publications suggests that most 
authors picked up this piece of information from the widely read account 
of events contained in Schlesinger’s A Thousand Days. Schlesinger 
opened Chapter 10, entitled “The Bay of Pigs,” with the statement that 
“On November 29, 1960, 12 days after he had heard about the Cuban 
project, the President-elect received from Allen Dulles a detailed briefing 
on CIA’s new military conception. Kennedy listened with attention, then 
told Dulles to carry the work forward.” 32 


32 Schlesinger, A Thousand Days , p. 233. 


62 



If this briefing occurred, it would be by far the most important in the 
series Kennedy received. This would place on the President-elect an ear¬ 
lier and more direct responsibility for the development of the operation 
than would otherwise be justified. In fact, however, the Dulles-Kennedy 
meeting of 29 November cited by Schlesinger appears not to have 
occurred at all. Available CIA records contain no mention of such a brief¬ 
ing. Dulles’s personal desk calendar shows that he had a very full day, 
with 10 different appointments running from 9:00 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., none 
of which were with the President-elect. It would be most extraordinary if 
the Director’s calendar or other CIA records failed to note a meeting of 
the DCI with the President-elect. 

Similarly, there is nothing in information available about Kennedy’s 
activities to indicate that he met with Dulles that day. The New York Times 
of 30 November reported that “The Senator worked at home throughout 
the day [of 29 November] leaving only to visit his wife Jacqueline and son 
John F. Jr. in Georgetown University Hospital.” The newspapers also 
reported that Kennedy had met at home that day with prospective Cabinet 
appointee Chester Bowles, and with Terry Sanford, the latter visiting to 
recommend Luther Hodges for a Cabinet position. Other visitors to the 
Kennedy home in Georgetown included his father, Joseph P. Kennedy, 
Edward Foley of the Inaugural Committee, and Senator Dennis Chavez of 
New Mexico. 33 

In thinking back on the briefings Kennedy received on the controver¬ 
sial Cuban operation, Ted Sorensen, his speechwriter and confidant, 
recalls, “President Kennedy did tell me, much later, that he had been 
briefed on the operation by the CIA while he was President-elect. CIA 
told him what they had in mind and why in some detail. That was the 
Palm Beach briefing.” Sorensen doubted that Kennedy received a more 
detailed briefing by Dulles on 29 November, adding “I saw him every sin¬ 
gle day and we discussed the whole range of policy matters—the foreign 
issues as well as 500 domestic ones.” 

Schlesinger was amused that he may have described a critical brief¬ 
ing that appears not to have occurred. In a letter to the author in 1993, he 
recommended that the original draft manuscript of his A Thousand Days 
be reviewed to ascertain whether the controversial assertion was foot¬ 
noted. “If nothing turns up I must take Rick’s way out,” he wrote, refer¬ 
ring to the character in “Casablanca” played by Humphrey Bogart. 
“Bogart: ‘I came to Casablanca for the waters.’ Claude Raines: ‘What 
waters? We’re in the desert.’ Bogart: ‘I was misinformed.’” 34 


33 The New York Times, 30 November 1960, pp. 1,30. 

34 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., letter to the author, 23 June 1993. 


63 



An important meeting concerning the Cuba operation, in fact, was 
held on 29 November at the White House at 11:00 a.m. with the Presi¬ 
dent—Eisenhower—in the chair. The President-elect was not included. 
Schlesinger and other authors, writing a few years after the fact, had obvi¬ 
ously learned that on that date “the President” was briefed on Cuba and, 
being oriented to President Kennedy, assumed that it was he who was 
involved. Indeed, the meeting of 29 November was an important one. On 
that date, Eisenhower underscored that he wanted to continue active plan¬ 
ning for the project. Eisenhower was pushing ahead vigorously; Kennedy 
was not yet responsible in any degree. 

Soon after his inauguration on 28 January 1961, Kennedy did receive 
a full briefing on the planned Cuban operation. At that meeting the new 
President authorized the Agency to continue its preparations and asked 
that the paramilitary aspects of the plan be provided to the Joint Chiefs for 
their analysis. Even in late January, however, Kennedy withheld specific 
approval for an invasion, with or without direct US involvement. 


Kennedy Visits the CIA 

One unique aspect of Kennedy’s familiarization with the CIA was 
the President-elect’s decision to visit CIA Headquarters during the transi¬ 
tion period. He was initially scheduled to visit the Agency’s South Build¬ 
ing, at 2430 E Street in downtown Washington, on 16 December. In 
preparation for the visit, Dulles asked Huntington Sheldon, the Director of 
Current Intelligence, to prepare a book for the DCI containing material he 
and senior Agency officials should use in discussions with Kennedy. 

The ambitious agenda that was prepared for the visit envisaged pre¬ 
sentations by the DCI and eight other senior officers. 35 Briefings were pre¬ 
pared on the Agency’s mission, organization, and budget, and on the legal 
basis for its activities. Dulles and others would describe the Agency’s 
relationship with the Congress; the functions of such organizations as the 
Watch Committee and the President’s Board of Consultants; and the func¬ 
tions of the several agencies that comprised the Intelligence Community. 
The Assistant Director for National Estimates would describe the esti¬ 
mates process and brief one specific paper, a recently published Estimate 
of the World Situation. 

The chiefs of the Agency’s key Directorates were primed to explain 
their roles and activities. The clandestine services portion of the briefing 
included a description of clandestine intelligence collection and the covert 
action functions. In the latter discussion, the Chief of Operations was to 
update “Cuban operations since the Palm Beach briefing.” 


35 CIA, “Agenda for President-elect,” 16 December 1960. 


64 



Owing to scheduling difficulties, Kennedy was unable to visit the 
Agency on 16 December. The visit was delayed until after the inaugura¬ 
tion and finally occurred on Thursday, 26 January 1961. Dulles’s desk cal¬ 
endar notes that the briefings were to run from 2:40 until 4:10 p.m. In 
reality, they had to be abbreviated considerably, much to the consternation 
of the participants, because an unintended opportunity came to the Presi¬ 
dent’s attention. 

For reasons having nothing to do with Kennedy’s visit, the Agency, a 
few weeks before, had put together an attractive exhibit of materials relat¬ 
ing to the history of intelligence that was located just inside the entrance 
of South Building. A number of exhibits were displayed under a sign that 
read, “These letters loaned courtesy of the Houghton Library of Harvard 
University.” The newly elected Harvard man immediately noticed the ref¬ 
erence to his alma mater. He stopped and read thoroughly the entire case 
of historical materials, much to the chagrin of Dulles and other waiting 
CIA executives. 

Kennedy was already frustrated at press leaks from his new Adminis¬ 
tration and, therefore, was especially taken with one of the letters in the 
display case. Written by General Washington to Col. Elias Dayton in July 
1777, that letter included the observation that “The necessity of procuring 
good Intelligence is apparent and need not be further urged—All that 
remains for me to add is, that you keep the whole matter as secret as pos¬ 
sible. For upon Secrecy, Success depends in Most Enterprizes of the kind, 
and for want of it, they are generally defeated. . .Kennedy asked Dulles 
if he could have a copy of the letter, which, of course, was sent promptly. 
The President wrote the CIA Director thanking him and the creator of the 
exhibit, Walter Pforzheimer, saying “The letter is both a fine memento of 
my visit with you and a continuing reminder of the role of intelligence in 
national policy.” 36 


Origins of the President's Intelligence Checklist 

Within days of his election, President Kennedy sent word to the 
White House that he would like to receive daily briefings on the same 
material that was being furnished to President Eisenhower. 37 The request 
from Kennedy came by way of one of his assistants for transition matters, 
Washington attorney Clark Clifford. Eisenhower approved the passage of 


36 John Kennedy letter to Allen Dulles, 10 February 1961. 

37 Goodpaster, Memorandum for Record, 17 November 1960. 


65 



this material to Kennedy on 17 November, the eve of Dulles’s trip to Flor¬ 
ida. There is no record that Dulles discussed this matter with Kennedy the 
next day, however, and some weeks were to go by before there was any 
organized follow-up. 

When Kennedy visited CIA Headquarters after his inauguration, 
Sheldon described the current intelligence products that were available to 
him. Kennedy reiterated that he wanted to read the publications and desig¬ 
nated his military aide, Brig. Gen. Chester Clifton, who was present at the 
meeting, to receive the material. Clifton had taken over Goodpaster’s role 
of providing daily briefings to the new President, although Goodpaster 
continued to serve in the White House for a few weeks to help with the 
transition. 

For the first few months of the Kennedy Administration, Agency 
couriers each morning would deliver CIA’s Current Intelligence Bulletin 
to Clifton. Clifton or MacGeorge Bundy would then take the material to 
the President, reporting back his questions or comments if there were any. 
Unfortunately, the intelligence report was part of a large package of mate¬ 
rial Kennedy received each day and was often not read. This left the new 
President less well informed than he thought he was, a situation that was 
soon driven home to him during his unfortunate encounter with Soviet 
Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, when he found himself unprepared 
to respond to his adversary’s boasting and bullying. 

From the start of the Kennedy Administration, Dulles had few oppor¬ 
tunities to present intelligence directly to the President. In large part, this 
was because Kennedy did not hold regularly scheduled NSC meetings as 
Eisenhower and Truman had done. In addition, however, there was a 
problem of personal chemistry and a generational gap between the new 
President and the CIA Director. Agency veterans at the time had the feel¬ 
ing that Dulles may have been patronizing to Kennedy in his early brief¬ 
ings, and, thus, was not warmly welcomed to the White House. 38 Along 
the same lines, Sorensen remembers Kennedy “was not very impressed 
with Dulles’s briefings. He did not think they were in much depth or told 
him anything he could not read in the newspapers.” In these awkward cir¬ 
cumstances, Dulles’s practice was to prepare written memorandums for 
the President on items that he deemed to be of particular significance, 
delivering them personally when possible. He also made personal deliver¬ 
ies when he wanted to bring certain important National Estimates to the 
President’s attention. 

The fiasco at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, reinforced by Kennedy’s 
frustration at the meeting with Khrushchev in early June, changed every¬ 
thing. General Clifton informed current intelligence director Sheldon that 

38 Richard Lehman, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 10 March 1993. 


66 



the President was reluctant to continue receiving intelligence in the nor¬ 
mal way. Clifton suggested that the Agency would have to come up with 
some entirely different way of presenting its information if it were to 
regain the President’s confidence. He volunteered that there was no point 
in the DCI discussing the matter directly with the President as that would 
be counterproductive. Dulles took this implicit criticism calmly, possibly 
foreseeing that the President’s disappointment with the Agency on this 
and other scores would lead, as it did in November 1961, to his own 
removal. 

Dulles gamely soldiered on in his attempts to bring the new President 
the fruits of the Agency’s collection and analysis in the traditional manner, 
but it was largely the unauthorized efforts of his subordinates that opened 
a new and less formal channel to the White House that would satisfy 
Kennedy and most of his successors. In mid-1961 Huntington Sheldon 
and other managers of the Office of Current Intelligence—working with 
Clifton but without the knowledge of their superiors either at the White 
House or the Agency—came up with a new intelligence briefing publica¬ 
tion designed exclusively for the President. Longtime current intelligence 
specialist Richard Lehman worked up a dry run of the proposed Presi¬ 
dent's Intelligence Checklist and Sheldon took it to Clifton for his 
approval. Clifton was pleased with the trial document, which eliminated 
the bewildering array of source classifications and restrictions common to 
intelligence publications and presented facts and analysis in short, vernac¬ 
ular paragraphs. 

The first issue of the new publication was delivered to Clifton on Sat¬ 
urday, 17 June, and carried by him to the President at his country home 
near Middleburg, Virginia. The first Checklist was a small book of seven 
pages, measuring 8-1/2 by 8 inches, that contained 14 items of two sen¬ 
tences each with a half-dozen longer notes and a few maps. Agency man¬ 
agers spent a nervous weekend; they were immensely relieved the 
following Monday morning to hear Clifton’s “go ahead—so far, so good.” 

Quickly it became clear that the President was reading the Checklist 
regularly and issuing instructions based on its contents. Not infrequently 
he asked to see source materials, estimates of developing situations high¬ 
lighted for his attention, texts of speeches by foreign leaders, and occa¬ 
sional full-length Agency publications that provided more depth, details, 
and explanations. Within a few months, the Secretaries of State and 
Defense asked to see what the President was reading. In December, six 
months after publication had begun, Clifton passed the word to the 
Agency that those two Cabinet members should be added to the sub¬ 
scriber list. 

No Agency officer sat with the President while he read the Checklist , 
but Clifton was careful to pass back to the Agency the President’s reac¬ 
tions and questions. CIA officials regarded the new system as the best 


67 




Attorney General Robert Kennedy and new DCI John McCone were charged by 
President Kennedy with “rebuilding ” CIA after the Bay of Pigs debacle. 


possible daily channel to a President. The relationship with Kennedy was 
not only a distinct improvement over the more formal relationship with 
Eisenhower, but would only rarely be matched in future administrations. 

Meanwhile, in November 1961, Allen Dulles had been replaced by 
John McCone, who served Kennedy as DCI for almost two years. In the 
early part of this period, McCone succeeded in rebuilding the Agency’s 
relationship with Kennedy. McCone saw Kennedy frequently, and the 
President—more than any other before or since—would telephone even 
lower level Agency officers for information or assistance. Interestingly, 
McCone’s prescience in alerting the President to the possibility that the 
Soviets would place missiles in Cuba backfired for him personally. 
Although he was right when most others were wrong, the President did 
not like McCone’s public references to this fact, and their relationship 
cooled noticeably. 


68 




















Editors of the Checklist were especially heartened in September 1963 
when Clifton passed back the President’s personal expression of delight 
with “the book.” A month later, on a morning when Clifton, McGeorge 
Bundy, and the Agency’s briefing officer were huddled in the basement of 
the West Wing going over the Checklist , President Kennedy called down 
asking where they were and when they were going to bring it to him. Clif¬ 
ton and his Agency contacts were also heartened by Secretary Rusk’s 
comment that the Checklist was “a damned useful document.” 

President Kennedy’s Checklist was published daily for two and a half 
years, capturing the regular attention of the President and serving his 
needs. Created out of an almost desperate desire to please a President who 
had found the Agency wanting, it proved to be the forerunner of the Presi¬ 
dents Daily Brief, the publication that was to serve all presidents from 
1964 to the present. 


The Transition to President Johnson 

The transition to President Johnson was as abrupt for the US Intelli¬ 
gence Community as it was for the rest of the country. In some respects, it 
was also as uncertain. Johnson had received a number of intelligence 
briefings as Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences 
Committee and later as Senate Majority Leader. He had met on one occa¬ 
sion with Allen Dulles in July 1960 while a vice-presidential candidate, 
but neither Dulles nor his successor, John McCone, had paid much atten¬ 
tion to keeping Johnson informed during the intervening years. 

Johnson, in turn, had paid relatively little attention to the products of 
the Intelligence Community while he was Vice President. Each day his 
office received the Agency’s Current Intelligence Bulletin , a widely dis¬ 
tributed product that contained less sensitive and less highly classified 
information than was included in the Checklist . Although the Checklist at 
the end of the Kennedy presidency was being sent also to the Secretaries 
of Defense and State and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
Johnson was unaware of its existence. For reasons undoubtedly growing 
out of the earlier political rivalry between Kennedy and Johnson, 
Kennedy’s intelligence assistant, Bromley Smith, early in the administra¬ 
tion had ordered that “under no circumstances should the Checklist be 
given to Johnson.” 39 

On Saturday morning, 23 November 1963, the day following 
Kennedy’s assassination, McCone instructed his Executive Assistant, 
Walter Elder, to telephone the new President’s secretary and inform her 
that the DCI would, as usual, be at the White House at 9:00 a.m. to give 


39 Lehman interview, 10 March 1993. 


69 



the President the regular morning intelligence briefing. 40 In reality, there 
was nothing usual or regular about the DCI’s involvement in a morning 
briefing, but McCone obviously believed he needed to take an extraordi¬ 
nary initiative to establish a relationship with the new President. 

McCone was waiting in Bundy’s office in the basement of the West 
Wing when the President entered at approximately 9:15. Johnson had 
been an infrequent visitor to those quarters, which also included the White 
House Situation Room, but he was forced to come there for the meeting 
because Kennedy’s office had not yet been cleared out. R. J. Smith, CIA’s 
Director of Current Intelligence, was present and talked briefly with 
Johnson in Bundy’s outer office, writing later that “he looked massive, 
rumpled and worried.” 41 

Despite the irregular and strained nature of the circumstances, 
McCone accomplished his mission during that first meeting with Presi¬ 
dent Johnson. The President expressed his confidence in McCone, who, in 
turn, reassured the new President that he and the Agency stood ready to 
support him in every way. McCone introduced the President to the Check¬ 
list and reviewed with him the unspectacular substantive items in the pub¬ 
lication that day. Johnson had few questions during their 15-minute 
session, but he did agree that McCone should brief him personally each 
morning at least for the next several days. The President asked that the 
Director bring any urgent matters to his attention at any time, day or night. 

The Checklist shown to Johnson on that first occasion was a bulky 
publication containing five unusually long items and six additional notes. 
R. J. Smith explained to Bromley Smith that the Agency had tried to pro¬ 
vide, as unobtrusively as possible, a bit of extra background for Johnson. 
Bromley Smith approved the strategy but added that he hoped the Agency 
would not be too obvious in its tutorials. In his memoirs, Johnson wrote of 
his relief to discover “on that sad November morning” that the interna¬ 
tional front was relatively peaceful and that there was nothing in the mate¬ 
rial McCone brought to him that required an immediate decision. 42 

McCone met with Johnson almost every day for the next two or three 
weeks, briefing him on virtually all the world’s trouble spots and provid¬ 
ing information from CIA files and collection efforts on President 
Kennedy’s assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald. The President told the Director 
to make sure that CIA gave the FBI all information and support necessary 
to its investigation of Oswald’s background. 

40 Walter Elder, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 21 April 1993. 

41 R. J. Smith, The Unknown CIA (Washington: Pergamon-Brassy’s, 1989), p. 163. 

42 Lyndon Johnson, The Vantage Point (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971), p. 22. 


70 



McCone also used these opportunities to inform the President of a 
variety of CIA covert action and technical collection programs, including 
the successful effort to build what became known as the SR-71 reconnais¬ 
sance aircraft to augment the U-2. McCone brought the President up to 
date on the status of the program (by that time a number of aircraft had 
been built) and to brief him on McCone’s discussions with President 
Kennedy about the advisability of making the program public. Secretaries 
Rusk and McNamara had urged Kennedy to announce the aircraft’s exist¬ 
ence and Kennedy was inclined to do so. But a discussion of the political 
and security issues involved prompted Johnson to postpone any public 
announcement of the program. He ordered McCone to get as many air¬ 
craft produced and deployed to the operating site as possible and eventu¬ 
ally revealed the existence of the aircraft at a press conference in February 
1964. 


Vietnam 

The most significant issue Johnson and McCone discussed during 
this period undoubtedly was Vietnam. McCone was straightforward in 
providing the Agency’s analysis of the course of the war there. Initially, 
this won him favor with the new President, who had not favored certain of 
the steps taken in Vietnam by his predecessor, but it was to lead ultimately 
to a falling out between McCone and Johnson. 

On 24 November, a mere two days after Kennedy’s assassination, 
Johnson met at 3:00 p.m. in the Executive Office Building with Rusk, 
McNamara, George Ball, Bundy, McCone, and Ambassador to South 
Vietnam Henry Cabot Lodge. According to McCone, Lodge informed the 
group that the United States had not been involved in the recent coup 
against President Ngo Dinh Diem. 43 In fact, Lodge had instructed a CIA 
liaison officer to tell the South Vietnamese generals that the US Govern¬ 
ment had lost confidence in President Diem, and he was kept aware of 
events before and during the coup on 1 November. During the course of 
the military takeover, Diem was captured and then killed. 

Lodge maintained that the population of South Vietnam was very 
happy as a result of the coup, showing the group assembled at the Execu¬ 
tive Office Building some pictures of crowds in Saigon. Lodge argued that 
the change in government in South Vietnam had been an improvement 
and that he was hopeful about the course of the war, expecting “marked 
progress” by February or March 1964. He also stated, without elaboration, 
that there were indications that North Vietnam might be interested in 
reaching mutually satisfactory arrangements with the United States. 

43 John McCone, Memorandum for the Record, “South Vietnam Situation,” 25 November 1961. 


71 



McCone wrote in his memorandum for the record that Lodge’s statements 
were “optimistic, hopeful and left the President with the impression that 
we were on the road to victory.” 

McCone presented the group with a much more pessimistic CIA 
assessment. He cited the continuing increase in Viet Cong activity over 
the previous month, predicting more and sustained pressures from the 
guerrillas. The Director pointed out that the South Vietnamese military 
was having considerable trouble organizing the government and was 
receiving little help from civilian leaders, who seemed to be staying on the 
sidelines. McCone said the Intelligence Community could not give an 
optimistic appraisal of the future. 

Johnson stated that he approached the situation in Vietnam with mis¬ 
givings and was anxious about calls in the Congress for a US withdrawal. 
While recognizing that he would have to live with the results of the coup, 
he was particularly doubtful that the United States had taken the right 
course in upsetting the Diem regime. He was critical, even harsh, about 
the divisions within the ranks of US advisers about the conduct of the war. 
He made clear his desire to replace several key figures in the US country 
team in Saigon and dictated that he “wanted no more divisions of opinion, 
no more bickering, and any person that did not conform to policy should 
be removed.” 

During McCone’s daily discussions of the Checklist , the President 
regularly raised the question of Vietnam. Despite his strictures against dif¬ 
ferences of opinion, he appeared to appreciate the fact that McCone’s 
assessments did not correspond to what he was hearing from others. The 
President repeatedly asked for the Director’s appraisal of the situation, but 
the continuing exchange between the two ultimately proved troublesome 
for the Director. In large part this was because Johnson sought McCone’s 
advice on the sensitive issue of who should “run the show” in South Viet¬ 
nam and discussed his thoughts on possible personnel changes among his 
advisers and ambassadors. 

Johnson remarked to McCone that, although he appreciated the work 
the DCI was doing in intelligence, he did not want him to confine himself 
to that role. The President invited the Director to come to him personally 
with suggestions for courses of action on policy that McCone thought 
wise, even if his ideas were not consistent with the advice others were 
providing. Johnson mentioned specifically that he was not satisfied with 
the advice he was receiving on nuclear testing, Cuba, and particularly 
South Vietnam. The President questioned McCone closely about the pros¬ 
pects in South Vietnam, underscoring his desire for an “objective 
appraisal.” The President specifically asked for any recommendations the 
DCI might have for modifying his Vietnam policy. 


72 



Johnson’s confiding in McCone during the first two weeks of his 
presidency clearly flattered the CIA Director but also put him in an awk¬ 
ward position with other key players in the government, as well as with 
his obligation as DCI to provide objective intelligence assessments. 
Within months, events were to reveal that McCone probably took the 
President more literally than he should have. The Director’s candor in 
providing advice to the President eventually strained their relationship. 

The President was not so completely preoccupied with Vietnam that 
he did not remember to focus on another enduring problem—the Castro 
regime in Cuba. Within a week of becoming President, he asked McCone 
how effective US policy was regarding Cuba and what the CIA projected 
to be the future of that country. Johnson was especially interested in the 
effectiveness of the economic embargo of Cuba and wanted to know what 
the Agency planned to do to dispose of Castro. The President said he did 
not want any repetition of “the fiasco of 1961,” the CIA-planned rebel 
invasion, but he felt the United States could not abide the existing Cuban 
situation and wanted the CIA to propose a more aggressive strategy. 
Johnson informed McCone that he looked to the CIA for firm recommen¬ 
dations. 

Initially, it was unclear whether Johnson would return to a system of 
regular NSC meetings or continue the more casual Kennedy approach. 
There was, therefore, much interest in the NSC meeting that the President 
called for 5 December 1963. At that meeting, McCone was to brief the 
group on the Soviet military and economic situation. He prepared thor¬ 
oughly for this first NSC meeting with the new President, bringing one 
assistant, Clinton Conger, and a number of large briefing charts to the 
meeting. 

To McCone’s surprise, Johnson had invited to the meeting the chair¬ 
men and ranking minority members of the leading Congressional commit¬ 
tees. The Director accommodated this novel approach by quickly briefing 
the Congressional leaders on the fact of, and restrictions related to, com¬ 
munications intercepts, which were to be mentioned during the briefing. 
Just as the meeting began, however, there was another surprise when the 
President gave a nod and in came his White House photographer. McCone 
was aghast as the photographer began shooting pictures left and right. He 
turned around with a start to confirm that Conger had managed to turn 
over a map of Soviet ICBM sites before the first pictures were taken of 
that end of the room. In the subsequent months, it was to become clear 
that Johnson was no more enamored of weekly NSC meetings than 
Kennedy had been. When a rare meeting was held, however, it normally 
began with an intelligence briefing by McCone. 

With few formal NSC meetings, much of the Agency’s relationship 
with the new President came to rest on the briefings McCone was provid¬ 
ing Johnson privately. Unfortunately, these soon became a casualty of the 


73 



differences emerging between the two men regarding Vietnam. The 
momentum of McCone’s contacts with Johnson was interrupted by a trip 
the Director took in December 1963 to review the Vietnamese situation. It 
was his second trip to Saigon since becoming DCI, and McCone was dis¬ 
couraged by what he found. His pessimism made him skeptical of propos¬ 
als Defense Secretary McNamara made for an extended program of 
clandestine raids against North Vietnam in early 1964. During a subse¬ 
quent trip to Vietnam in March 1964, McCone’s reservations deepened, 
and he concluded that the war effort, even with McNamara’s enhance¬ 
ments, was not succeeding. 

McCone recommended to the President a six-point program to 
reverse the deteriorating situation that would involve an escalation of US 
military actions significantly beyond anything considered by McNamara 
and Johnson. Johnson refused to accept the DCI’s recommendations. As 
the President came to side with McNamara’s approach to the conduct of 
the war, he became increasingly impatient with McCone and with the con¬ 
tinuing differences between the DCI and the Secretary of Defense. By the 
end of March 1964, Johnson clearly had lost confidence in McCone and 
interest in his regular intelligence updates. In the succeeding months 
McCone attempted periodically to restart his briefings of the President, at 
least on an occasional basis, but Johnson turned him aside. 

In June 1964 the Director informed the President for the first time 
that he would like to resign as soon as Johnson had decided on a succes¬ 
sor. 44 Despite his growing disenchantment with McCone, Johnson insisted 
that he remain in his post until after the presidential election in November 
1964. 


Evolution to the President's Daily Brief 

Providing the Checklist to President Kennedy had worked so well 
that CIA naturally hoped the arrangement would continue with Johnson, 
but this was not to be. In his first weeks as President, Johnson read the 
Checklist and seemed interested in discussing its contents during his meet¬ 
ings with McCone. After those meetings stopped, however, Johnson 
tended not to read the daily publication. 

Observing that Johnson was no longer reading the Checklist , General 
Clifton (who had stayed on from the Kennedy Administration as military 
aide to the President) proposed the idea of a twice-weekly intelligence 
report. CIA managers thought this strategy was worth a try. In truth, they 
thought that anything that would catch the President’s eye was worth a 


44 Elder interview, 21 April 1993. 


74 



try; several formats were offered during this period. They had been dis¬ 
mayed by Bromley Smith’s assessment that Johnson was probably disin¬ 
clined to read the Kennedy-tailored Checklist that had been denied him as 
Vice President. 

On 9 January the first issue of the semi weekly President's Intelli¬ 
gence Review was taken to Clifton at the White House. The next morning 
Clifton called Lehman at CIA to report that he had shown the new publi¬ 
cation to the President at breakfast and it had “worked like a charm.” At 
the end of January, Clifton again made a point of seeking Johnson’s reac¬ 
tion to the Intelligence Review. The President observed at that point that 
he found it a valuable supplement to the intelligence briefings he received 
and wanted the publication continued without change. 

Although the President read primarily the semiweekly review, his 
staff requested that the Checklist continue to be published daily to enable 
them to answer the President’s frequent spur-of-the-moment questions. 
With the President not reading the Checklist most days, McCone decided 
he would expand its readership; he obtained permission to send it to four 
additional officials in the State Department, two more in Defense and in 
the Joint Chiefs, and to the office of the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
Attorney General. 

The practice of producing two Presidential intelligence publications 
worked well through the election year of 1964. The President typically 
read the Review on the return leg of campaign trips, and his staff felt well 
supported with the daily Checklist. As the election neared, however. Sec¬ 
retary of State Rusk expressed to McCone his concern about the security 
of the Checklist as a result of its expanded dissemination. Rusk was wor¬ 
ried about possible leaks regarding sensitive policy issues during the cam¬ 
paign. The DCI was more concerned about the basic question of whether 
it made any sense to publish a “Presidential” Checklist when the President 
himself almost never read it, but agreed something should be done. 

Meanwhile, during the 1964 electoral campaign, Johnson’s oppo¬ 
nent, Senator Barry Goldwater, set a precedent by declining to receive 
intelligence briefings. In July, after consulting with the President, McCone 
had telephoned Goldwater to offer the customary briefings. According to 
his assistant, Walter Elder, Goldwater replied only that he would consider 
it. Within hours, an assistant called to decline, explaining that the Senator 
appreciated the offer but felt he had all the information he needed to con¬ 
duct his campaign. McCone, reflecting a frustration he and Johnson 
shared, mused “he probably does; the Air Force tells him everything he 
wants to know.” 

Responding to the concerns of the Secretary of State and the DCI 
about the circulation of the Checklist l , R. J. Smith proposed that the most 
graceful way for the Agency to drop a number of the readers of the Check¬ 
list would be to discontinue the publication and produce a new one. Smith 


75 




President and Mrs. Lyndon Johnson pose with their first grandchild and a copy of 
the President’s Daily Brief. President Johnson read the PDB at any time it could he 
fitted into his schedule. He received intelligence briefings from the DCI at weekly 
luncheons. 

observed that the Agency would maximize the likelihood that Johnson 
would accept a new publication and read it regularly if it were produced to 
conform as much as possible to his work habits. Because Johnson did 
much of his reading at night, in bed, Smith recommended that the publica¬ 
tion be published and delivered in the late afternoon as the Review had 
been, rather than in the morning like the Checklist . 

Smith’s proposal was accepted, and after the election both the Check¬ 
list and the Review were dropped. The new President's Daily Brief ’ 
designed specifically for President Johnson, was delivered to the White 
House on 1 December 1964. Its fresh appearance obviously appealed to 
the President. His assistant, Jack Valenti, sent the first issue back to Bundy 
with word that the President read it, liked it, and wanted it continued. 
Quite apart from the packaging of the current intelligence. President 
Johnson—like other presidents—was becoming a closer reader of the 
daily products as he became increasingly enmeshed in foreign policy mat¬ 
ters. By mid-February 1965, for example, he was reading not only the 


76 












PDB but also CIA’s daily Vietnam situation report, which Bromley Smith 
insisted be delivered at 8:00 a.m. each day so that it could be sent to the 
President early. 

In early 1965, Johnson agreed that the time had come for McCone to 
return to the private sector. That understanding undoubtedly was furthered 
by a letter the Director delivered to Johnson on 2 April in which the 
Director argued against an expanded land war in Vietnam and concluded 
that US bombing was ineffective. 45 By coincidence, the day that McCone 
passed the directorship of CIA to his successor, Admiral William 
Raborn—28 April—was also the day US Marines landed in the Domini¬ 
can Republic to deal with the crisis there. It was during the Dominican 
crisis that word was received that the PDB had taken firm root in the 
White House. Presidential spokesman Bill Moyers said on 21 May, 
approximately six months after the PDB had been launched, that the Pres¬ 
ident read it “avidly.” 

The PDB process that was in place in early 1965 continued more or 
less unchanged throughout the Johnson administration. CIA did not 
receive from Johnson the steady presidential feedback that it had received 
from Kennedy. The Agency knew, however, that the President was read¬ 
ing the PDB regularly, and Johnson’s aides, usually Bromley Smith, were 
consistently helpful in passing back the President’s reactions, criticisms, 
and requests. The only significant change made in the PDB process came 
when the President again reversed himself and indicated he wanted to 
receive the PDB early in the morning rather than in the evening. He had 
decided that he wanted to see the PDB at 6:30 a.m., before he began read¬ 
ing the morning newspapers. 

Those newspapers later provided conclusive evidence that the publi¬ 
cation was reaching the President. Agency personnel were surprised one 
morning to see a photograph in the papers showing the President and Mrs. 
Johnson sitting in the White House in dressing gowns. Mrs. Johnson was 
holding their first grandson while the President was reading a copy of the 
President's Daily Brief ’ 

45 Elder interview, 21 April 1993. 


77 




Chapter 4 


Nixon and Ford: Uneven Access 


During his eight years as Vice President in the 1950s, Richard Nixon 
had had broad exposure to the activities of the civilian US Intelligence 
Community. He was aware that the CIA had briefed the presidential can¬ 
didates in every election since 1952 and undoubtedly harbored mixed 
feelings about the way the process had worked in 1960, when his narrow 
defeat by John Kennedy might well have hinged on the candidates’ differ¬ 
ent perceptions of the intelligence process. This familiarity with the Intel¬ 
ligence Community’s capabilities and practices made him willing, at the 
outset of his new campaign for the presidency in 1968, to accept briefings 
from CIA Director Richard Helms. It also led him to decline to receive 
routine briefings from lower level officers, opening the way for Henry 
Kissinger, his National Security Adviser, to play a central and expanding 
role. 

Nixon won the Republican Party nomination on 8 August 1968. Two 
days later the nominee and his running mate, Governor Spiro Agnew of 
Maryland, flew to Texas to hear a “general review of the international sit¬ 
uation” from outgoing President Lyndon Johnson and his key foreign pol¬ 
icy advisers. In addition to the President, the group included Secretary of 
State Dean Rusk, Cyrus Vance (the number-two negotiator in the Vietnam 
peace talks in Paris), and DCI Helms. The President welcomed the 
Republican candidates with a tour of his ranch in an open convertible, but 
when the time came for the substantive briefing, he made only a few intro¬ 
ductory remarks and then gave the floor to the CIA Director. 

Helms’s memorandum for the record indicates that he focused on the 
handful of international developments that were at a critical stage during 
the late summer of 1968, including the confrontation between Czechoslo¬ 
vakia and the Soviet Union, events in the Middle East, and the military 
situation in Vietnam. 1 The Director also discussed Cuba, including Cas¬ 
tro’s support for revolutionary efforts in Latin America, and events in the 

1 Richard Helms, Memorandum for the Record, “Briefing of Former Vice President Nixon and 
Governor Agnew,” 12 August 1968. 


79 




President Richard Nixon greets employees at CIA Headquarters as DCI Richard 
Helms looks on. Nixon retained Helms from the previous administration but dealt 
with him distantly through his White House staff. 

Dominican Republic and Haiti. Following Helms’s briefing, Vance contin¬ 
ued with a review of developments in the Paris peace negotiations that 
included details of the private talks under way between the United States 
and North Vietnam. 

Helms recorded that Nixon and Agnew were interested, in particular, 
in the effects of the Soviet-Czechoslovak confrontation on Poland and 
Yugoslavia. He also noted that they were surprised to hear that the North 
Vietnamese were demanding that the Saigon government negotiate 
directly with the Communist shadow administration in South Vietnam, the 
National Liberation Front. During the course of the briefing, Nixon 
directed a number of policy questions to Rusk. The Republican candidate 
made clear he had no intention of saying or doing anything that would 
complicate the job of the US negotiators in Paris. 


80 













Looking back on his first briefing of candidate Nixon 25 years after 
the fact. Helms recalled that, in his view, it was not a particularly well- 
organized or useful session. 2 After his own 15-minute overview of key 
worldwide developments, he recalled, the politicians’ instincts took over 
for the balance of the discussion in the sitting room at the LBJ ranch and 
during the one-hour lunch that followed. Johnson was on a liquid diet, 
recovering from a bout of diverticulitis, so he was free to do all the talking 
while the others enjoyed a meal of steak and corn on the cob. Helms 
recalled with some amusement that the President of five years and the 
candidate, with his eight years of vice-presidential experience, each 
wanted to demonstrate to the other his mastery of foreign affairs. 

Nixon appears to have been pleased with the session; he later wrote 
positively in his memoirs about the “full-scale intelligence briefings 
ordered by Johnson for each of the nominees.” 3 The session concluded 
with the President’s assurance to Nixon that he could call on Rusk or 
Helms for any additional information he might require. 

As it happened, the discussion in Texas on 10 August was the only 
briefing Nixon was to receive in the preelection period. That session had 
focused entirely on the facts of developments abroad and the status of 
negotiations in which the United States was involved. Unlike the situation 
that had developed in 1960, there was in the August briefing—and in the 
whole campaign in 1968—no effort by anyone to make a political issue of 
the Intelligence Community’s programs or analysis. A key factor that 
helped ensure that did not happen was Helms’s strict constructionist view 
of the CIA Director’s job. He was determined to stick to the facts and 
avoid involvement in policy discussions, unlike his predecessors Allen 
Dulles and John McCone. 

Helms was aided in his determination to avoid any politicization of 
intelligence in 1968 by the fact that there were no presidential debates that 
year. Although there had been one debate during the primaries (between 
Robert Kennedy and Eugene McCarthy), once the nominations were final 
Nixon concluded that he could avoid debating his opponent, Vice Presi¬ 
dent Hubert Humphrey, just as Johnson had declined to debate Goldwater 
in 1964. Nixon’s judgment was buttressed by the results of polls showing, 


2 Richard Helms, interview by the author in Washington, DC, 16 March 1993. Subsequent com¬ 
ments of Helms come also from this interview. 

3 Richard Nixon, The Memoirs of Richard Nixon (New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1978), p. 316. 
Nixon’s Democratic opponent in 1968, Hubert Humphrey, routinely received intelligence reports 
by virtue of being the incumbent Vice President. Two other candidates also received intelligence 
briefings in that unusual year: former Alabama Governor George Wallace on 26 July and Georgia 
Governor Lester Maddox on 21 August. Helms and others briefed each of these candidates in 
Rusk’s office, generally on the same array of subjects they had covered with Nixon. Very brief ac¬ 
counts of these sessions can be found in Helms’s Memorandums for the Record: “Briefing of 
Former Governor George C. Wallace,” 26 July 1968; and “Briefing of Governor Lester Maddox,” 
22 August 1968. 


81 



as early as the first week in September, that he was leading Humphrey by 
a substantial margin, which he was able to retain throughout the cam¬ 
paign. 

After a postelection vacation in Key Biscayne, Florida, President¬ 
elect Nixon and his wife returned to New York City on Monday, 
11 November, stopping en route in Washington for lunch with the Presi¬ 
dent and an impromptu afternoon of discussions with the President and 
his foreign affairs aides. In addition to the President, Rusk, and Helms, 
this time the group also included Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford, 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Earl Wheeler and National 
Security Adviser Walt Rostow. Helms remembers that the afternoon meet¬ 
ing in the Cabinet room suffered from the short notice and complete lack 
of preparation given the participants. There was only a desultory 
exchange on substantive issues, inasmuch as “nobody knew what was 
wanted or expected.” 

Invigorated by his election and vacation, the President-elect was 
struck by the very different mood of the other participants as they concen¬ 
trated on Vietnam. 4 He recalled that those assembled seemed very nearly 
worn out from dealing with the prolonged crisis and “had no new 
approaches to recommend to me.” Nixon said he saw the war etched on 
the faces around him and found them relieved to be able to turn the 
morass over to someone else. He recorded that they emphasized to him 
that the United States must see the war through to a successful conclusion 
and that a negotiated settlement that looked like a defeat would have a 
devastating impact on US allies and friends in Asia and around the world. 

From Helms’s point of view, the meeting on 11 November was of 
significance for a reason unrelated to the discussion of Vietnam. Helms 
remembers that Johnson asked him to stay on for a private talk after the 
session adjourned. At that time, Johnson told Helms that Nixon had twice 
asked about him (Helms). Johnson said he told Nixon that he “had no idea 
how Helms had voted, but that his was a merit appointment.” 

Johnson’s kindness in recommending Helms to the Nixon Adminis¬ 
tration may have resulted from a lingering embarrassment over the way he 
had treated Helms at an earlier point. In 1965, Johnson had passed over 
Helms to appoint VAdm. William Rabom, Jr., as DCI. At the time, 
Johnson informed Helms that, although he had heard good things about 
him, “you are not well enough known in this town,” meaning on Capitol 
Hill. But Johnson went on to tell Helms that he “should attend every 
meeting Rabom did.” 

The Director’s only other meeting with Nixon during the transition 
period occurred later the same week when he was summoned to New 
York City on Friday, 15 November. Helms entered the Nixon suite on the 


4 Nixon, The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, p. 336. 


82 



39th floor of the Pierre Hotel at 1:30 p.m. to find the President-elect con¬ 
versing with adviser John Mitchell, who was to become Attorney General. 
With virtually no preliminaries, Nixon indicated that he would like Helms 
to stay on as DCI. The public announcement would come some time later. 


Supporting Nixon’s Team in New York City 5 

Discussions between Johnson and Helms resulted in a decision that 
CIA should make available to the President-elect in New York City the 
same daily intelligence information being provided to the outgoing Presi¬ 
dent in Washington. Helms assigned the task of providing this assistance 
to the Agency’s Deputy Director for Intelligence, R. J. Smith. As a first 
step, he asked Smith to confer with Nixon’s chief aide, former advertising 
executive Robert Haldeman. 

Joined by Howard Osborn, CIA’s Director of Security, and Richard 
Lehman, Deputy Chief of the Office of Current Intelligence, Smith went 
to New York on the morning of 12 November. 6 Smith showed Haldeman a 
sample of the intelligence publications the Agency proposed to make 
available to Nixon—the President's Daily Brief (PDB), the Central Intel¬ 
ligence Bulletin (CIB), the daily Situation in Vietnam , the Weekly Review , 
and selected memorandums. In turn, Haldeman asked that the Agency ini¬ 
tiate special intelligence security clearances for a number of staff mem¬ 
bers, including Richard Allen and Martin Anderson. They had been the 
President-elect’s advisers on foreign affairs during the campaign and were 
to advise him during the transition period. 

It was agreed that CIA should establish a reading room in a secure 
area to which members of the Nixon staff could come for security indoc¬ 
trination and to read classified documents. Space was not available in the 
Pierre, so it was decided to locate the Agency’s outpost, dubbed “DDI - 
New York,” in the basement of the Nixon campaign headquarters at 450 
Park Avenue, six blocks from the office of the President-elect. This site, 
formerly the world headquarters of the North American Missionary Alli¬ 
ance and soon to be demolished, was chosen because it seemed unlikely to 
attract attention from the press and the public. Allen’s office was also in 
the building. 


5 The material that follows regarding the Agency’s activities in New York City draws very heavi¬ 
ly on the classified writings of the late Paul H. Corscadden; he is, in effect, the author of this sec¬ 
tion. 

6 They had planned to fly, but a heavy snowfall intervened, and the three men traveled by train in¬ 
stead, arriving at Pennsylvania Station in the storm-struck metropolis at the onset of the evening 
rush hour. They were provided a police escort to take them through the badly snarled traffic to the 
Central Park area and the Pierre Hotel. 


83 



Paul Corscadden, an 11-year veteran of the Agency’s Office of Cur¬ 
rent Intelligence, was designated officer in charge. Kenneth Rosen, an 
intelligence officer who had served in the White House Situation Room 
under President Johnson and worked a year as a special assistant to 
McGeorge Bundy, was second in command. Corscadden and Rosen 
moved into the Statler-Hilton Hotel at 7th Avenue and 33rd Street for the 
duration of the transition period. Because of the expense of living in New 
York and the representational nature of the assignment, the Executive 
Director of CIA waived the standard per diem limitation and allowed each 
of them up to $30 per day. 

The area selected to house the Agency’s facility required extensive 
renovation, which, magically, was accomplished by CIA’s Office of 
Logistics in 72 hours, including one weekend. The construction activity 
did not go unnoticed by other occupants of the building. Reports soon cir¬ 
culated that the Secret Service, the FBI, or some other sensitive, top secret 
government agency had moved in and would, among other things, assume 
responsibility for the physical security of all the President-elect’s staff 
offices and the protection of his family. The CIA Office of Security had 
decided not to identify the operation as Agency sponsored but, rather, to 
allow those who learned of its existence to draw whatever conclusions 
they chose. This decision, reasonable on the face of things, led to unex¬ 
pected consequences. Before long, Nixon staff secretaries were calling to 
ask that someone “behind the Black Door” investigate the disappearance 
of office supplies or solve the mystery of a purloined television set. On 
another occasion, the supervisor of the staff mailroom demanded that one 
of the Agency communicators “taste” and immediately remove from the 
mailroom a crate of canned hams sent to the President-elect as a Christ¬ 
mas gift. 

Those who were curious about what was housed behind that Black 
Door enjoyed the unwitting support of the municipal health authorities. 
Occupants of nearby buildings along Park Avenue had complained of an 
infestation of black rats that had established colonies in the ground around 
the brightly lighted Christmas trees festooning the avenue from 59th 
Street to Grand Central Station. Within hours, health inspectors poured 
through all the nearby buildings. A team came to the door of the Agency 
facility, demanding admission. They were turned away with the assurance 
that there were no rats inside. 

Beginning on 19 November, intelligence publications were wired to 
New York on a daily basis. The Situation in Vietnam report arrived the 
evening of its publication in Washington; the PDB came soon after five 
a.m. each morning. Nixon staff members who had access to the intelli¬ 
gence publications came to the facility at their convenience. A reading 
table contained all of each day’s publications, along with appropriate 


84 



National Intelligence Estimates, special memorandums, intelligence hand¬ 
books, and various graphic aids. Of the key staffers, Allen and Anderson 
visited most often. 

Corscadden and Rosen delivered a complete set of publications each 
day in a sealed envelope marked “Eyes Only—The President-elect” to 
Rose Mary Woods in Nixon’s office. Woods had been granted the proper 
clearances, and the Agency had installed a safe in her office for the secure 
storage of classified materials. Initially, it was thought that she probably 
would return the publications after two or three days, during which time 
the President-elect would have had the opportunity to read at least a cur¬ 
rent issue of the PDB. 

For the first 10 days of the operation, only intelligence analyses pre¬ 
pared for the outgoing administration were made available to the Presi¬ 
dent-elect’s staff. It soon became apparent, however, that the needs of the 
incoming administration did not coincide in every detail with those of the 
Johnson administration. To meet the emerging special needs of the new 
team, the Office of Current Intelligence on 29 November compiled the 
first “Nixon Special,” an “Eyes Only” intelligence memorandum based on 
sensitive intelligence information that the Agency knew would be of inter¬ 
est to Nixon. The Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) soon 
afterward provided an additional service by transmitting directly to New 
York from its field bureaus foreign press and radio articles pertaining to 
the incoming administration. 


The Key Player: Henry Kissinger 

The appointment of Harvard Professor Henry Kissinger as Assistant 
for National Security Affairs was announced by the President-elect at a 
news conference on 2 December. By prior arrangement with DDI Smith, 
who had telephoned him from Washington the morning of Nixon’s 
announcement, Kissinger came to the Agency facility on Park Avenue for 
a briefing that same afternoon. 7 He was shown current issues of all the 
intelligence publications available in the facility and was told what had 
been delivered to the Pierre for the President-elect since the Agency sup¬ 
port operation began. Kissinger was assured that the CIA was prepared to 
provide full support to him and the rest of the incoming administration. 

During that first session, Kissinger expressed appreciation for the 
Agency’s willingness to assist him and for the support it had so far pro¬ 
vided the incoming administration. He promised to arrange his schedule 


7 A more detailed discussion of Smith’s exchange with Kissinger can be found in his memoirs, 
The Unknown CIA: My Three Decades with the Agency (Washington: Pergamon-Brassey’s, 
1989), pp. 201-203. 


85 



to allow 15 minutes per day to read the intelligence publications. He also 
accepted a proposal that Corscadden and Rosen undertake during off-duty 
hours to advise him of any critical world developments requiring the 
attention of the President-elect. This precautionary arrangement had ear¬ 
lier been accepted by Allen and Anderson as well as Haldeman. 

Kissinger asked for time to become familiar with Nixon’s reading 
habits and daily routine before advising the Agency of any recommenda¬ 
tions he might have for changes. He did say—in what foreshadowed 
Nixon’s style and his own, in the White House—that it had been made 
clear to him that the President-elect had no intention of reading anything 
that had not first been perused and perhaps summarized by one of his 
senior staff. Kissinger said he did not know what had happened to issues 
of the PDB already entrusted to Rose Mary Woods but that, without his 
prior approval, future deliveries would not reach the President-elect. Two 
days later, Kissinger underscored that the Agency should not provide 
intelligence support to anyone at the Pierre other than the President-elect 
and himself; Mr. Haldeman and others from the campaign might have 
access to classified publications after they had arrived in Washington, but 
they would have no need for them before that time. 

Kissinger reacted none too favorably to the first few issues of the 
PDB that he read. At one time he expressed a preference for the CIB with 
its more complete text and greater detail. He complained that the prose in 
the PDB was too often elliptical and that the selection of topics was too 
random and lacked the continuity necessary for the uninitiated reader. 
Kissinger’s points were well taken. The PDB was uniquely tailored to the 
needs of the outgoing administration—just as its predecessor had been 
shaped to the reading preferences of President Kennedy. Moreover, its 
authors could assume that President Johnson and his advisers were famil¬ 
iar with the background of the subjects covered each day. Nixon and Kiss¬ 
inger, however deep their background and however well read, lacked 
detailed familiarity with many of the ongoing, current issues addressed in 
the PDB. 

This situation had been anticipated by the Agency, because it had 
come up in all prior transitions. The Office of Current Intelligence had 
already begun to devise a new version of the PDB for Nixon and his aides. 
Considerably expanded in length, the new brief had been circulated for 
comment to the DCI, DDI, and others of the Agency’s principal officers. 
With their concurrence, it was decided to send the new PDB to New York. 
Kissinger approved its format and style at a meeting on the evening of 
6 December. Thus, the Agency began to publish, in effect, two PDBs. The 
substance was the same, but the publication given to Johnson was signifi¬ 
cantly more concise than that given to Nixon. 


86 



To no one’s surprise, it proved impossible to schedule briefings with 
Kissinger on a daily basis; he was seen frequently but unpredictably. His 
assistant, Lawrence Eagleburger of the Department of State, was seen 
every day and was notably more appreciative of the assistance he was pro¬ 
vided. 

On 9 December, Kissinger told Corscadden that he had been asked to 
brief the President-elect’s “senior staff’ and would need inputs for a 30- 
minute session on the Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia, the state of 
US-Chinese relations, the US-USSR strategic arms balance, and the Arab- 
Israeli conflict. He asked especially for “tidbits, local color...things which 
will make these people think they’re getting the inside story but which, if 
leaked, will not compromise or embarrass me or the President-elect or the 
United States Government.” He promised to come to Park Avenue soon to 
review the drafts. 

On the afternoon of 11 December, Kissinger paid his second visit to 
the basement suite on Park Avenue, arriving with Eagleburger. It was evi¬ 
dent that the two had discussed the format Kissinger preferred even before 
he had seen the materials prepared by the Agency. Eagleburger’s assign¬ 
ment was to redraft CIA’s contribution. After scanning the briefing book 
and posing one or two questions about France’s nuclear program, Kiss¬ 
inger asked for still more material on Berlin, the problem of Nigeria’s 
breakaway state of Biafra, the strategic arms balance, NATO, the Russian 
intervention in Czechoslovakia, and the prospects for a meeting in War¬ 
saw of Chinese and American representatives. Kissinger delegated to 
Eagleburger responsibility for preparing “drafts” for his consideration the 
next evening in Washington, when the President-elect proposed to unveil 
his Cabinet during a nationwide television broadcast from the Shoreham 
Hotel in Washington. Eagleburger worked in the basement at Park Avenue 
until three o’clock in the morning, returned to the Pierre for a few hours’ 
rest, and then resumed the job of redrafting and editing the briefing Kiss¬ 
inger was to give. 

Eagleburger’s task was complicated by the fact that, except for 
Woods, none of the Nixon clerical staff, including Kissinger’s secretary, 
had yet been granted special intelligence security clearances. Corscadden 
arranged to have Eagleburger’s preliminary text typed by the Agency sec¬ 
retary assigned to DDI-NY and to have it taken to the Pierre. Eagleburger 
was then driven to LaGuardia Airport for his flight to Washington. CIA 
officers met Eagleburger at National Airport and took him to an impro¬ 
vised two-room office at the Shoreham Hotel. They remained with Eagle¬ 
burger for much of the night of 12 December, calling on the Agency’s 
analytical resources to provide substantive backup through the Duty 
Officer in the Operations Center. 8 

8 The CIA officers involved in this exercise were delighted later in the month when Kissinger 
sent Helms a letter of thanks for their extraordinary efforts. 


87 



During his late-evening television appearance, the President-elect 
disclosed that he and his Cabinet-to-be and top advisers would spend the 
following day, Friday, 13 December, in conference. One of the highlights 
of their all-day session would be an intelligence briefing by Kissinger. 
Agency officers received no direct feedback on the substantive discus¬ 
sions held on 13 December. They were interested that Kissinger, in their 
next meeting, directed that Attorney General-designate Mitchell receive 
the PDB and all other reports in which he expressed any interest. Before 
long, Mitchell was being briefed on a daily basis and proved to be “very 
helpful as a window into what Nixon wanted.” 9 

In mid-December, Kissinger also directed that no National Intelli¬ 
gence Estimates were to go to the President-elect. Somewhat sharply, he 
explained that no one department or agency of the government would be 
permitted to present its views directly to Nixon to the disadvantage of any 
other. Corscadden pointed out that a National Intelligence Estimate was 
the product of the Intelligence Community as a whole, that it was issued 
in the name of the United States Intelligence Board, and could not be con¬ 
sidered “parochial.” This rejoinder had no appreciable effect. 

Toward the end of December, Kissinger began to meet more regu¬ 
larly with Corscadden and Rosen. By then Kissinger was able to read only 
the PDB with any regularity; DDI-NY was responsible for calling to his 
attention “critical items” in other publications. The balance of the 15- 
minute “daily” session was devoted to a capsule review of crucial interna¬ 
tional situations the new administration was likely to face during its first 
few months in office—“stressing the significance, not the facts”—and to 
discussion of whatever papers Kissinger had requested of the Agency. He 
directed that memorandums prepared for Nixon should contain a “state¬ 
ment of the problem and an assessment of its significance,” as well as a 
summary. 

Kissinger’s reading of an Estimate on Soviet strategic attack forces 
led him to ask for an oral briefing on the US-Soviet strategic balance. 
After consulting with his military aide, Gen. Andrew Goodpaster, and 
with Eagleburger, Kissinger decided that the J-3 section of the Joint 
Chiefs should take the lead. CIA’s Deputy Director for Science and Tech¬ 
nology and Director of Strategic Research were also invited to participate 
in the briefing, which was held on Saturday, 21 December 1968. In addi¬ 
tion to Kissinger, Mitchell, Eagleburger, and Goodpaster were present. 

This was the most formal briefing Kissinger received during the tran¬ 
sition; unfortunately, it did not go well. The J-3 team that had traveled 
from Washington to conduct the briefing used only the “high side” num¬ 
bers regarding Soviet capabilities in preparing their text and graphics. 
This prompted the CIA experts present to try to supplement the briefing 


9 Richard Lehman, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 10 March 1993. 


88 



and question some of its conclusions. In the discussion that followed, 
Kissinger, Goodpaster, and finally Mitchell asked ever-more probing 
questions, to the obvious chagrin of the briefers. Kissinger and Mitchell 
both made clear after the fact that they were not satisfied. 

The issue of possible direct State Department involvement in the 
support process in New York arose as a result of a PDB item on coup 
reports in a certain country. Kissinger asked about US contingency plans 
if a coup occurred. When the Agency officers replied that they were not 
normally privy to such contingency planning, Kissinger turned to Eagle- 
burger and insisted that a representative of the Department of State attend 
the morning briefing sessions. Eagleburger discussed the idea with CIA, 
but nothing came of it. Years later, describing how the system worked, 
Eagleburger recalled that he “occasionally called on the State Department 
to send specific written materials—I was from State, after all—but the 
Agency team was all we needed right there.” 10 

As Kissinger became more and more active toward the end of 
December, his probing questions and his insatiable demands for assess¬ 
ments of the significance of isolated developments—even those in the low 
order of probability—meant that far more speculative, estimative analysis 
was required. This led CIA to the strategy of having its substantive offic¬ 
ers prepare detailed backup pieces to complement the topics covered each 
day in the PDB. These reports provided the generalists who briefed Kiss¬ 
inger with additional information with which to field his queries. 

Mindful of Kissinger’s repeated requests for “problem papers,” spe¬ 
cial briefings on emergent crises likely to confront the new administration 
during its first months in office, and “must reading” before Inauguration 
Day, the Agency in late December began appending to the PDB a series of 
special papers focused on critical issues. For more than 18 months, the 
PDB, at President Johnson’s request, had carried special annexes on Viet¬ 
nam and on North Vietnamese reflections on the US political scene. Kiss¬ 
inger decided that the annexes need not be sent to the President-elect and 
should not be published after Inauguration Day. The new “problem 
papers” were designed in part, therefore, to replace the Vietnam annexes 
in the New York edition of the PDB, which was by now being tailored for 
the incoming administration. 

In the remaining days of the operation, Kissinger read the “problem 
papers” on such subjects as access to Berlin, the Communist troop buildup 
in South Vietnam, the military balance between the two Koreas, and the 
French economic situation. For each of these subjects, CIA analysts with 
the appropriate expertise traveled to New York to accompany the regular 
briefers. Especially in the cases of Vietnam and Korea, Kissinger had 


10 Lawrence Eagleburger, telephone interview by the author, 1 November 1993. Other comments 
by Eagleburger also come from this interview. 


89 



numerous questions. He wanted to know the Agency’s past track record in 
estimates on the subject at hand and pressed the analysts for “your per¬ 
sonal opinion.” 

On 6 January, Kissinger, who initially became Nixon’s National 
Security Adviser, turned to the question of intelligence support on Inaugu¬ 
ration Day and thereafter. By this time, Nixon had expressed his intention 
to hold regular staff meetings with his key advisers at 9:00 a.m. or 
9:30 a.m. each morning. Kissinger surmised that he would brief the Presi¬ 
dent for 30 minutes each morning, immediately following these staff con¬ 
ferences. He did not want to give Nixon anything he and his National 
Security Council staff had not had time to mull over, and was anxious to 
“preview” intelligence reporting each evening, with an eye to meeting the 
Chief Executive early the next day. 

Kissinger proposed that the DCI change the publication time for the 
PDB from early morning to late afternoon, releasing the publication to 
him in the evening and to the President the following morning. This 
change, Kissinger admitted, would introduce a lag of 12 hours in the 
reporting time, but he was not disturbed that the PDB would be less cur¬ 
rent; he was more concerned that he have time to prepare his own com¬ 
ments on anything the President would see. 

With Inauguration Day less than a week away, the Agency proposed 
to introduce to the President-elect and Kissinger an entirely new PDB— 
redesigned to meet Kissinger’s specifications for a briefing paper tailored 
to Nixon’s preferences. The new publication was to consist of three sec¬ 
tions—Major Developments, Other Important Developments, and occa¬ 
sional annexes—all double spaced and printed on legal-size paper bound 
at the top. 

The first section, Major Developments, was to be subdivided into 
sections on Vietnam, the Middle East, Soviet Affairs, and Europe. This 
was not a static listing. As developments warranted, some areas could be 
dropped, others added. The second section, Other Important Develop¬ 
ments, was intended to highlight problems which—though not yet criti¬ 
cal—could in time engage US policy interests. The annexes were to fulfill 
the same role as the “problem papers” that were appended to the PDB sent 
to New York during the early part of January. Kissinger approved the new 
format on 15 January 1969. 


Nixon Remains Aloof 

The support operation mounted in New York constituted the most 
elaborate system yet designed to provide intelligence to a President-elect. 
Ironically, Nixon’s aloof style resulted in a situation where the Agency 
had no direct contact with him. Until mid-December, for example, 


90 



Agency officers were uncertain whether he had been reading the PDB or 
the other publications deposited each morning with his secretary. On 
18 December, Eagleburger confided that Nixon had informed Kissinger 
that Woods had been “stockpiling” the unopened envelopes containing the 
PDB, CIB, and memorandums on Vietnam. Nixon had asked Kissinger to 
send someone upstairs to retrieve these envelopes so that Kissinger could 
review the collection and decide whether there was anything in it that the 
President-elect should read. The question had been answered: Mr, Nixon 
had read no Agency publications during the first month of the New York 
operation. 

Eagleburger observes that Nixon’s handling of the intelligence mate¬ 
rial was a result of his management style rather than any disinterest in for¬ 
eign developments. In fact, he says, “Nixon was very interested—but it 
was just him and Henry. That’s why you didn’t brief him directly.” Eagle¬ 
burger did not see Nixon either—briefings of the President-elect were the 
prerogative of Kissinger alone. 

Other accounts, however, confirm more directly that Nixon’s refusal 
to receive intelligence briefings personally stemmed from negative atti¬ 
tudes about the CIA that went well beyond an aloof and formal manage¬ 
ment style. Goodpaster, who worked with the transition staff to help 
organize the national security apparatus, remembers discussing with 
Nixon how the Eisenhower team had handled intelligence support. Good- 
paster says Nixon “acknowledged the importance of intelligence, but also 
commented that when you needed it, it often wasn’t there.” 11 

Discouraging as it was to CIA officers not to have personal contact 
with Nixon, a great deal of Agency material did reach the President-elect 
through Kissinger’s daily briefings. According to Eagleburger, “Henry 
made heavy use of the CIA material. I remember especially Korea and 
other Asian issues. Henry would go in and go over the material with 
Nixon; documents would be left behind that Nixon would read.” Rosen 
remembers how pleased the Agency team was when it would occasionally 
receive back from Kissinger copies of the PDB initialed by Nixon, con¬ 
firming that at least some of the material was being read. 12 

Throughout the two months of the operation in New York, there was 
some uneasiness among Agency managers because Kissinger levied 
heavy demands for analytic work in the President’s name, and Eaglebur¬ 
ger levied similarly heavy demands in Kissinger’s name. Without direct 
access to the principal consumer, it was always unclear how much of this 
material was really wanted or read by Nixon himself. For the most part, 
however, it did not matter. CIA took pride in serving those who clearly 
would be the key foreign policy aides to the new president. 


11 Andrew Goodpaster. telephone interview by the author, 17 November 1993. 

12 Kenneth Rosen, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 22 March 1993. 


91 




Director Helms waits to deliver his intelligence briefing at a meeting of the National 
Security Council. These formal meetings, revived from the Eisenhower Administra¬ 
tion, provided the only regular channel for presidential briefings by the DCI during 
Nixon s tenure. 


On one occasion the ambiguity about who was really speaking for 
whom was especially worrisome. A few days before the inauguration, 
Kissinger called Helms in Washington with a discouraging message. He 
said that the CIA Director, following the inauguration, should brief the 
National Security Council on intelligence matters at the opening of its 
meetings but should then leave the meetings before the policy discussions. 
This scenario was represented by Kissinger as Nixon’s idea, but Helms 
knew it was a ridiculous idea. Long experience had shown him that poli¬ 
cymakers, during the course of their deliberations, frequently needed to 
turn to the representative of the Intelligence Community for factual 
updates. 

Two days following the inauguration, the first NSC meeting was 
held. At the outset, Nixon invited the attendees to stay for lunch following 
the meeting. With this encouragement, Helms stayed through the meeting 
and lunch. And with the precedent established, he simply stayed through¬ 
out all subsequent NSC meetings. The scenario earlier raised by Kissinger 
never surfaced again. 


92 

















CIA’s direct access to Nixon was limited to the briefings by the 
Agency’s directors—Richard Helms, James Schlesinger, and, finally, 
William Colby—at meetings of the National Security Council. In an inter¬ 
view in 1982, Helms offered a graphic account of how difficult those 
meetings could be, especially during the early period of the Nixon presi¬ 
dency: 

From the very beginning of the Nixon administration, Nixon was criticizing 
Agency estimates, estimates done back when he was Vice President. What 
he knew about estimates in the intervening years I don’t know. But he 
would constantly, in National Security Council meetings, pick on the 
Agency for not having properly judged what the Soviets were going to do 
with various kinds of weaponry. And obviously, he was being selective, but 
he would make nasty remarks about this and say this obviously had to be 
sharpened up. The Agency had to understand it was to do a better job and 
so on. And I haven’t the slightest doubt that Nixon’s carping affected Kiss¬ 
inger, who after all was his national security advisor.... 

Despite this challenge to the estimates, the analysis and so forth of the 
Agency, the fundamental fact remains that if the things had not been read, if 
people were not paying attention to them there never would have been the 
challenge. So I don’t think anybody needs to feel bad about a rocky period 
in the Agency’s history. It was bound to be a rocky period with Richard 
Nixon as President, given the fact that he held the Agency responsible for 
his defeat in 1960. And he never forgot that and he had a barb out for the 
Agency all the time because he really believed, and I think he believes to 
this day, that that “Missile Gap” question was the responsibility of the 
Agency and that it did him in. 13 


When he was elected President in 1968, Nixon could hardly have 
imagined how the collection capabilities of the US Intelligence Commu¬ 
nity had improved since the end of his term as Vice President eight years 
before. At the time he had left that office, several years of U2 flights had 
given the United States an invaluable look at the Soviet Union. But the 
flights had been intermittent and covered only a portion of Soviet territory. 
As a result, the United States in 1960 was still dealing in conjecture, albeit 
informed conjecture, about possible deployed Soviet strategic systems. In 
1968 it was dealing in facts. It was never clear that the cynical President 
appreciated what had changed. 

As the years passed, the NSC forum was less and less fruitful. Colby 
remembers that “Nixon didn’t operate well in meetings—he liked to make 
decisions on the basis of written material. When you did brief him on 

13 Richard Helms, interview by R. Jack Smith, Washington, DC, 21 April 1982. 


93 



something, he looked like his mind was on other things—he may have 
been thinking about Watergate, I guess.” 14 Colby wrote in his memoirs 
that none of Nixon's three DCI’s saw him outside formal or ceremonial 
meetings. “I remember only one private conversation with him; it 
occurred when he phoned to ask what was happening in China and I pro¬ 
vided a quick summary off the top of my head.” 15 

Throughout the Nixon presidency, the PDB was delivered by courier 
to Kissinger’s office. Each day Kissinger delivered to the President a 
package of material that included the PDB along with material from the 
State Department, the White House Situation Room, the Joint Chiefs, and 
others. Nixon would keep the material on his desk, reading it at his conve¬ 
nience throughout the day. Feedback to the Agency typically was pro¬ 
vided by Kissinger directly to the DCI. 


A Closer Relationship With Ford 16 

In the late spring of 1974, when it was becoming apparent that Nixon 
would not survive the Watergate scandal, the DCI saw a responsibility and 
an opportunity. 17 William Colby, who had been appointed Director in Sep¬ 
tember 1973, decided that CIA should help the new Vice President, Ger¬ 
ald Ford, prepare for his probable elevation to the Presidency. Colby’s 
initiative was to afford CIA unprecedented direct and daily access to the 
President when Ford moved into the Oval Office. 

Colby modestly recounts that his decision to provide full intelligence 
support to Ford “had as much to do with good preparation in case some¬ 
thing happened to the President—any president—as it did with Nixon’s 
problems with Watergate.” Colby remembers his belief at the time that 
“we should get the PDB to the Vice President so that he would know 
everything the President knew. We didn’t want another situation like when 
Truman was unaware of the Manhattan project.” 


14 William Colby, interview by the author in Washington, D.C., 7 April 1993. Unless otherwise 
noted, subsequent comments by Colby also come from this interview. 

15 William Colby and Peter Forbath, Honorable Men: My Life in the CIA (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978), p. 373. 

16 The material that follows regarding the Agency’s support of President Ford was in large part 
drafted by David A. Peterson. 

17 In the election campaign of 1972, there had been no special intelligence briefings. Nixon, as the 
incumbent president, continued to receive the PDB. His Democratic opponent, Senator George 
McGovern, at one point had agreed (against the counsel of his advisers) to receive an intelligence 
briefing from Kissinger. The CIA was to follow up with regular briefings. Unfortunately, the po¬ 
litical crisis involving McGovern’s running mate. Senator Thomas Eagleton, forced the cancella¬ 
tion of the Kissinger briefing, and it proved impossible to reschedule either that briefing or the 
others that were to follow. 


94 



Whatever his mix of motives, Colby invited the Vice President to 
visit CIA Headquarters. Ford came, on 12 June 1974, and was given wide- 
ranging briefings on intelligence operations and assessments. In response 
to Ford’s request, Colby agreed to send him the PDB, in addition to the 
NID he had been receiving. An Agency current intelligence specialist, 
David Peterson, was assigned to provide continuing intelligence support 
to the Vice President. 

Ford accepted a suggestion that the PDB be brought to him directly, 
acknowledging that this would be the most secure way to receive the sen¬ 
sitive document. He specified that he would like to see it early each morn¬ 
ing, preferably as his first appointment. Beginning 1 July that became the 
regular routine, one that was altered only occasionally by such diversions 
as a Vice Presidential breakfast with the President or a speaking engage¬ 
ment out of town. On a few occasions Ford was seen at his Alexandria 
home before he flew off to keep such an engagement. Always a gracious 
host, he brewed and served instant coffee. 

Ford came to the vice-presidency an informed consumer of the prod¬ 
ucts of the Intelligence Community. He notes that he “had become famil¬ 
iar with CIA first as a member of the Intelligence subcommittee on 
Appropriations; later in other roles, including Minority Leader. I knew 
Colby from my days in Congress.” This familiarity, particularly with 
Colby personally, was to provide the Agency at least a temporary buffer in 
some difficult times to come. 18 

When Nixon resigned and Ford was sworn in as President on 
9 August 1974, Agency officers were uncertain whether the briefings 
would continue. It seemed probable that Kissinger would intervene and 
terminate the sessions, substituting some other arrangement. (He was 
described later as “furious” when he learned of the CIA briefing routine, 
of which he had not been informed.) The uncertainty was short lived; that 
evening Ford passed the word that he wanted his usual briefing the next 
morning at the White House. 

On Saturday morning, 10 August, Ford seemed as awed as Peterson 
when he entered the Oval Office to begin his first full day as Chief Execu¬ 
tive. Gen. Alexander Haig, who was to carry on as chief of the White 
House staff, was also present. The walls and furniture in the Office were 
bare following the removal of Nixon’s pictures and possessions. The 
famous desk had only a telephone console on it, prompting the new Presi¬ 
dent to tell Haig that he would rely on him to help keep the desk unclut¬ 
tered. 

18 Gerald Ford, interview by the author in Beaver Creek, Colorado, 8 September 1993. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all observations by Ford come from this interview. 


95 



To Peterson’s surprise, in view of Haig’s presence, the President first 
asked for his intelligence briefing. He was given a status report on a sensi¬ 
tive operation that interested him, after which he read the PDB, punctuat¬ 
ing his perusal with a couple of questions. 

During that first session, Ford asked Haig for his views on how the 
intelligence briefing should fit into the daily Presidential schedule. Haig 
replied that Nixon had received the PDB along with several other reports, 
cables, and overnight summaries to read as time permitted during the day. 
The General went on to say, however, that an early daily intelligence 
briefing was a better idea. Ford agreed, expressing satisfaction with the 
routine that had been established and observing that such an arrangement 
would help prepare him for a subsequent daily meeting with Kissinger. 
The new President evidently felt at some disadvantage in discussing for¬ 
eign affairs with his Secretary of State and wanted as much advance sup¬ 
port as he could get. Accordingly, the CIA briefer would continue to be 
the President’s first appointment each morning. 

Peterson’s initial session in the Oval Office ended on a mildly embar¬ 
rassing note. He exited the Office through the nearest door—only to find 
himself at a dead end. A second door, which he later learned led to a 
smaller, more private office for the President, was locked, trapping him in 
the passageway. The Presidential lavatory was on one side opposite a 
Pullman kitchen where stewards prepared refreshments. It was obvious 
that unless he was prepared to stay indefinitely, he would have to reenter 
the Oval Office, where the President and Haig were still conferring. Peter¬ 
son knocked, opened the door with apologies and sheepishly explained his 
predicament. The President laughed and professed that he didn’t yet know 
his way around the West Wing very well either. He directed Peterson out 
another door to the hallway. The observant briefer noticed that this door 
had no frame and was papered to blend with the wall. 

For two days during the first week of the Ford presidency, Peterson 
met alone with the President each morning. On the third morning, Gen. 
Brent Scowcroft, then Kissinger’s assistant as National Security Adviser, 
indicated that henceforth he would accompany Peterson. Although this 
arrangement probably was prompted, in part, by Kissinger’s desire to 
know what CIA was telling the President, Scowcroft’s presence undoubt¬ 
edly enhanced the value of the session for Mr. Ford. The President would 
raise questions about the policy implications of the intelligence, and 
Scowcroft would either provide the answers or undertake to obtain an 
early assessment. It soon became evident that no previous President had 
derived such prompt benefit from the Agency’s current intelligence 
reports. 

The daily contact with Ford facilitated CIA’s ability to respond to his 
intelligence needs. Immediately after each briefing session, Peterson 
would report via secure telephone to his immediate boss, the Director of 


96 



the Office of Current Intelligence, who would relay any Presidential que¬ 
ries, messages, or comments to the DCFs daily staff meeting at 9:00 a.m. 
With that kind of communication, the Director and his senior aides could 
get rapid feedback, and the President’s needs could promptly be served. 

A further advantage of the direct contact involved the security of the 
PDB. By carrying it away after the President read it, CIA was able to 
maintain complete control of his copy of the publication. Coupled with 
the more stringent controls that were applied to a second copy provided 
Scowcroft, which he later showed to Kissinger, CIA was able to terminate 
the wide exposure that the PDB had had among members of the White 
House and National Security Council staffs during the Nixon presidency. 

Once it was clear that the Agency had established a secure and expe¬ 
ditious channel for providing sensitive material directly to the President, 
the Agency’s Director and Deputy Director for Operations granted per¬ 
mission to publish articles drawn from the Agency’s most protected 
sources. Occasionally operational activities also were reported. Highly 
sensitive intercepted messages were included on a regular basis for the 
first time. To limit access to such compartmented material even within the 
Agency, it was typed on loose pages that were stapled into the copies for 
the President and Kissinger. 


Discussing Operations and Intelligence 

One tightly held operation was not covered in the PDB, but Ford was 
provided an oral account of its status each morning while it was in 
progress. That operation, the Glomar Explorer project, was an intricate 
undertaking to raise a Soviet ballistic missile submarine that had sunk in 
the Pacific. In his memoirs, Ford wrote of the deliberations that occurred 
“on the second morning of my Presidency, (when) Kissinger, Scowcroft, 
Schlesinger, and CIA Director William Colby came to the Oval Office to 
advise me that Glomar Explorer was on station and ready to drop the 
claws.” 19 

Two decades after the event, the former President remembered well 
his apprehensions about the operation, saying, “I did feel the Glomar 
action was a gamble. We didn’t know what the Soviets would do. But I 
was convinced we had to take the risk, in terms of what we stood to gain.” 

Fortunately, Ford had been briefed on the Glomar project in detail 
during his visit to CIA as Vice President two months earlier. Like 
Kennedy on the Bay of Pigs operation. Ford had less time than he would 
have liked to become familiar with the plans. Unlike the Cuban undertak¬ 
ing, however, the operation in the Pacific did not result in a challenge to a 

19 Gerald Ford, A Time to Heal (New York: Harper and Row, 1979), pp. 135-136. 


97 



new President. The Soviets, unaware of their lost vessel’s location, 
watched the “deep-sea mining” operation with interest, but did not 
attempt to thwart it. 

There is no doubt that the drama associated with the Glomar 
endeavor and Ford’s keen interest in it helped to certify for him the utility 
of the daily briefing sessions. Later, however, it was Peterson’s unhappy 
lot to inform the President that an accident during the lifting operation had 
caused the fragile hulk to break apart, resulting in the loss of a critical por¬ 
tion of the submarine. 

An ancillary benefit from these daily meetings with Ford was the 
closer cooperation that developed between the PDB staff and the White 
House Situation Room, which provides round-the-clock support to the 
President on foreign developments and national security affairs. At 
Scowcroft’s request, after each briefing session the Agency representative 
would give an account of the meeting to Situation Room personnel so 
they could get a better insight on the President’s interests and concerns. In 
addition, CIA’s PDB staff began to inform them each evening of the topics 
to be covered in the PDB the following morning so they would not dupli¬ 
cate coverage of any current development in their own morning summary 
for the President. 20 

The President soon became acutely conscious that CIA’s reporting 
was problem oriented. Told on one occasion that the Agency did not have 
much to tell him that day, he replied that he wasn’t disappointed. “When 
there is more to report, that usually means you have more bad news.” 

Sometimes the bad news was political and preceded the Agency’s 
briefer into the Oval Office. One such occasion came in March 1975, the 
day after the DCI had testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Com¬ 
mittee on the situation in Cambodia, where the Lon Nol regime was under 
heavy attack by Khmer Rouge forces. The President’s first words that 
morning were that he was unhappy about “what your boss said on the Hill 
yesterday.” He had read an account of the Director’s testimony in the 
Washington Post, which quoted Colby as saying the Lon Nol regime 
would have little chance to survive even with the supplemental US aid the 
President had requested from Congress. Scowcroft helpfully pointed out 
that the advance text of the Director’s statement did not include any such 
remark. It turned out the DCI’s response to a question from the Committee 
had been quoted out of context. 


20 One morning Ford’s dog. Liberty, was in the Oval Office. While the President read the PDB, 
the friendly and handsome golden retriever padded back and forth between Scowcroft and Peter¬ 
son. All was well until her wagging tail struck the President’s nearby pipe rack. The clatter of 
pipes and other smoking paraphernalia brought swift Presidential retribution; Liberty was ban¬ 
ished, never again to appear during a PDB meeting. 


98 



The eventual success of the Khmer Rouge and the forced US with¬ 
drawal from Vietnam soon led to the Mayaguez affair. The seizure of the 
US-owned container ship by the Communist forces occurred in the early 
hours (Washington time) of 12 May 1975. Before the CIA briefer left for 
the White House, the Agency’s Operations Center armed him with a map 
and the latest information on the incident, still in progress, including mes¬ 
sages sent a short time earlier by the ship’s radioman as Khmer Rouge 
troops were boarding the vessel. 

The President was distressed to receive this news, but by the time 
Kissinger got to him on the telephone during the PDB session Ford had 
absorbed the facts and had given some thought to the implications. Plans 
for the subsequent rescue operation began to formulate during that con¬ 
versation with Kissinger. Ford recalls that, in the end, the Mayaguez inci¬ 
dent “gave us a welcome opportunity to show that we were not going to 
be nibbled at by our enemies.” 

The morning briefing session was not confined solely to current intel¬ 
ligence. Selected National Intelligence Estimates and other memorandums 
occasionally were provided as well. The most timely and effective exam¬ 
ple of this occurred shortly before Ford’s meeting with Soviet President 
Leonid Brezhnev at Vladivostok in November 1974. The day before the 
President’s departure, the PDB carried the key judgments of the annual 
Estimate of Soviet strategic forces, and the briefer emphasized the under¬ 
lying rationale and principal conclusions of the study. A copy of the com¬ 
plete NIE with its voluminous annexes was given to him to take along on 
the trip. The Agency also had put together a 10-minute film with color 
footage of Brezhnev in an informal setting that was shown to Ford in the 
Cabinet Room before his departure. 

Events had pressed Ford to decide very quickly in his presidency 
whether to follow through with Nixon’s commitment to the Vladivostok 
meeting. As a result, he probably studied the intelligence reporting on this 
issue as closely as any. The President recalls that although he “had only a 
few months, I felt fully prepared to discuss the substantive issues as a 
result of the briefings I had received in Congress, as Vice President, and 
then as President.” 

In 1993, Ford recalled clearly the distrust of Agency analysis he had 
felt during his early years in Congress, when Allen Dulles and others 
seemed to be exaggerating the Soviet threat. He claimed to have had no 
similar reaction to the Agency’s work during his own brief presidency but 
offered the cautious assessment that “in part it may have been that by then 
I had a pretty good understanding of my own of what the situation in the 
USSR was all about.” 


99 




President Gerald Ford, flanked by Secretary of State Kissinger and Defense Secre¬ 
tary Schlesinger, convenes an NSC meeting with DCI William Colby (at far end of 
table) in attendance . Colby's formal briefings of Ford were limited to such occa¬ 
sions. 

Ford did not receive his intelligence material exclusively through the 
PDB. He used NSC meetings much more effectively than his predecessor; 
indeed, he probably used them more effectively than any president since 
Eisenhower. The NSC sessions almost always began with an intelligence 
update. Colby remembers that Ford, unlike Nixon, “always paid attention 
and was engaged. He was well informed.” 

Ford, too, remembers the formal NSC meetings as useful. In thinking 
back on those sessions, he remarked, “On substantive performance, I 
thought very highly of Bill Colby. I saw him primarily at the NSC. He 
always briefed, for example on Vietnam as we were forced to withdraw, 
on the Mayaguez seizure by the Cambodians, and on SALT.” 

Outside the formal NSC structure, however, Colby had few contacts 
with Ford and, thus, little direct personal knowledge of the issues the 
President was concentrating on at a given time and his intelligence needs. 
Colby has written that “my own reluctance to push into the Oval Office 
unless I was invited or had something that I thought demanded my per¬ 
sonal presence, combined with a lively awareness of the probable reaction 
if I had tried to elbow past Henry Kissinger, kept me from pressing for 


100 















personal access to either Nixon or Ford. In retrospect, I consider this one 
of the errors I made as Director, although I am not sure how I could have 
done any differently.” 21 

Ford makes the same point, recalling, “The Sunday when Colby 
came to my office to resign was probably the first time I met with him 
one-on-one. I don’t remember ever telephoning him directly for informa¬ 
tion.” 


Political Problems Undermine the Briefing Process 

Regrettably, the domestic political problems the CIA created for Ford 
before long began to outweigh the good will built up by the Agency’s sub¬ 
stantive support. Within months of Ford’s accession to the presidency, the 
Agency, and then the White House, were buffeted by public accounts of 
CIA’s past involvement in domestic spying, feckless preparations for pos¬ 
sible assassinations, and covert action undertakings in Chile. As the Rock¬ 
efeller Commission and the Church and Pike Committees exposed more 
and more information about the Agency’s real and imagined misdeeds, the 
Director’s standing with Ford weakened. Colby was not responsible for 
the sins of the past, and, in fact, had ordered some controversial programs 
halted, but his handling of the issues—in particular, his failure to forewarn 
the White House of breaking embarrassments—caused Ford and Kiss¬ 
inger to lose confidence in him. 

Ford recalls that in 1975 “I talked with Colby, although not regularly, 
about the difficulties the Agency was having with the Church and Pike 
Committees. In addition to the real problems, the committees were up to 
some political mischiefmaking. We went through a terrible time. We just 
needed a fresh start with the Congress.” 

Intended or not, the system of PDB briefings of the President became 
a casualty of the shakeup Ford instituted on 3 November 1975 among his 
senior National Security officers. Colby and Secretary of Defense James 
Schlesinger were replaced, respectively, by Ambassador George Bush and 
Donald Rumsfeld, until then the President’s White House Chief of Staff. 
Scowcroft was elevated to Assistant to the President for National Security 
Affairs, the position Kissinger had retained with Scowcroft as his deputy, 
after assuming stewardship of the Department of State. 

Concerning the change in procedures that accompanied the personnel 
shifts, Ford recalls, “The result was we set up a better system where I had 
an oral presentation (of information available from all agencies) by Brent 


21 Colby, Honorable Men , pp. 373-374. 


101 




Former Ambassador George Bush accepts applause and congratulations from out¬ 
going DCI Colby and President Ford after his swearing-in at the CIA Headquarters 
auditorium. Though he respected Colby s professional expertise, Ford hoped Bush s 
Congressional and diplomatic experience would help the new DCI improve the CIA s 
standing with Congress. 


(Scowcroft). Dave Peterson had been very helpful, but his separate ses¬ 
sions were no longer necessary. Scowcroft had more time for the daily 
briefs than Henry had. Kissinger had been wearing two hats and didn’t 
have time to handle the morning meetings properly. I took away his sec¬ 
ond hat. Henry was not happy about that, but he understood.” 

Ford maintains that under the new procedures “I continued to be very 
conscientious about reading the PDB. I was interested in the information.” 
CIA, no longer present, lost the benefit of the President’s immediate reac¬ 
tion to each PDB. Scowcroft saw the President often, but he was not nor¬ 
mally present when the President read the PDB, and, therefore, had little 
to pass on in the way of the President’s views and questions relating to the 
intelligence he was receiving. As a consequence, the PDB could no longer 
be tailored as well to suit Ford’s personal needs. 


102 












There was no indication that Ford felt deprived after the daily PDB 
sessions ended. At the CIA, however, the experience of 14 months of 
daily meetings with the President, contrasted with the succeeding months 
without those meetings, confirmed vividly the stark truth that there is no 
substitute for direct access to the President. 

George Bush returned from China to become DCI in January 1976. 
He had been a colleague of Ford’s in the Congress and was untainted by 
the Agency’s image problems. Even in these improved circumstances, 
however, he found it necessary to rely primarily on the written PDB and 
on briefing opportunities at NSC meetings to keep the President informed. 
Even he had relatively few one-on-one meetings with the President. For 
his part, Ford remembers that there was “no material change” in his rela¬ 
tionship with Bush (compared with Colby) as far as the presentation of 
substantive intelligence was concerned. 

Ironically, it would not be until Bush himself was in the Oval Office 
that CIA would again establish with a president a working relationship as 
fruitful as the one it had enjoyed during the first half of the Ford presi¬ 
dency. 


103 




Chapter 5 


In-Depth Discussions With Carter 


In late June 1976, Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter distinguished 
himself in the eyes of CIA officials by becoming the first presidential 
hopeful to request intelligence briefings even before receiving his party’s 
nomination. Carter’s request, which was directed to President Gerald 
Ford, prompted discussions involving the President, CIA Director George 
Bush, and National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft about who should 
provide such intelligence briefings and when they should be made avail¬ 
able to the candidate. Bush recommended to Ford that as a first step he, 
Bush, should meet with Carter to discuss the ground rules and arrange for 
follow-on briefings, which would be delivered by intelligence profession¬ 
als. The ever-cautious Scowcroft recommended instead that all briefings 
should be given by the DCI, accompanied and supported by the appropri¬ 
ate National Intelligence Officers, who were the Intelligence Commu¬ 
nity’s senior substantive experts. 

These deliberations resulted in a decision by Ford that Bush should 
meet with Carter to discuss the parameters and arrangements for the pro¬ 
vision of intelligence support. Such a session could be arranged before the 
nomination. Following the nomination, Carter would be provided in-depth 
intelligence briefings by the National Intelligence Officers. The President 
insisted that the DCI chair the sessions even though he would not neces¬ 
sarily be obliged to give the briefings himself. 

Pursuant to the President’s instructions. Bush contacted Carter to 
arrange a meeting. The two met on 5 July in Hershey, Pennsylvania, 
where Carter was attending a meeting of Democratic governors. In the 
course of the meeting, the Director informed Carter that the President had 
asked him to preside over the briefings that would follow. Bush intro¬ 
duced to Carter one senior Agency officer, Deputy to the DCI for National 
Intelligence Richard Lehman, noting that he would be the action officer in 
charge of preparing the briefings that would follow in Plains, Georgia. 
They would begin after the Democratic Convention the next week. Carter, 
in turn, indicated that he would welcome detailed discussions of selected 


105 



subjects such as Soviet strategic programs. He designated his “issues 
man,” Stuart Eizenstat, to be his contact and proposed to receive briefings 
every week to 10 days. 

Although the initial meeting was to have been limited to a discussion of 
the arrangements for future briefings, Lehman noted in his Memorandum for 
the Record that “The conversation ranged over virtually the entire field of 
intelligence.” 1 Carter was briefed on a number of current developments 
abroad and was shown a variety of intelligence materials and publications, 
including satellite photographs. Lehman reported that the Governor asked 
a great many questions “ranging from the future of Rhodesia to morale in the 
Agency.” 

In thinking back to that pre-nomination meeting with the DCI in 
Pennsylvania, Carter recalled in 1993 that “I was very honored to have 
President (then DCI) Bush come to brief me. President Ford offered every 
assistance. I hardly knew him and had never been in the Oval Office.” 2 

In soliciting the CIA briefings. Carter was already displaying the 
interest in detail that was to be a mark of his presidency. The day follow¬ 
ing his meeting with Bush in Pennsylvania, Carter told newsmen that he 
would receive “a six-hour briefing” shortly after the Democratic nomina¬ 
tion. On several subsequent occasions during the campaign, the Governor 
expressed the hope that by being fully informed he could avoid commit¬ 
ting himself to positions that might later embarrass him as a candidate or 
as President. Asked in 1993 about his motives in arranging what became a 
series of immensely time-consuming sessions, Carter affirmed that “I 
wanted the long briefings in Plains. I wanted particularly not to make any 
inadvertent mistake that would complicate things for President Ford on 
SALT or later for me.” Just prior to the presidential debates, Carter 
remembers “I wanted to know what was going on.” 


Extended Preelection Briefings 

When the time came in late July to meet Carter in Plains, Agency 
officers discovered that the first challenge was to get there. CIA's Director 
in 1976 normally used a Gulfstream aircraft for his travel within the 
United States. Plains had a 4,400-foot sod airstrip that was not suitable for 
Gulfstream operations. The manager of the airfield at Americus, Georgia, 
some 10 miles from Plains, informed the Agency aircrew that Gulfstream 
aircraft had occasionally used his 4,200-foot paved airstrip, but that they 
should be aware there was no kerosene fuel available at the facility. More¬ 
over, the airfield at Americus had no control tower and was, thus, suitable 


1 Richard Lehman, Memorandum for the Record, “Meeting with Governor Carter.” 6 July 1976. 

2 Jimmy Carter, interview by the author in Atlanta, Georgia, 23 June 1993. Unless otherwise indi¬ 
cated, subsequent quotations from Carter come from this interview. 


106 



for operation only in daylight hours. On discovering that the nearest all- 
weather facility with an instrument landing system was at Albany, some 
45 miles from Plains, Agency officials sought help from the US military. 

A few phone calls resulted in arrangements whereby Bush and his 
party would travel from Washington, DC, directly to Lawson Army Air¬ 
field at Fort Benning, Georgia. At Fort Benning, they were told, the Direc¬ 
tor would be transferred to a US Army Bell helicopter for a 30-minute 
flight to Peterson Field at Plains. The Agency aircrew that normally flew 
the DCI was puzzled that their manuals made no mention of Peterson 
Field. Another call revealed that it was not exactly Peterson Field; rather, 
it was Peterson’s field, Peterson being a farmer who owned land at the 
edge of Plains. 

In the planning stages of the first visit, Lehman and Carter’s press 
secretary, Jody Powell, agreed that they should minimize press attention 
to the Director’s visit. This strategy was intended to reinforce the nonpo¬ 
litical nature of the briefings, Powell having assured CIA that the Gover¬ 
nor wanted to avoid any appearance of taking political advantage of the 
Agency briefing. However, with the growing number of reporters in 
Plains desperate for news, and with the expected helicopter arrival, it 
became obvious that the visit would not go unnoticed. The press was, 
therefore, informed of the time and place of the Director’s arrival. Bush 
talked briefly with reporters after disembarking from the helicopter, 
enabling the rest of the party to unload the briefing materials and travel 
the short distance to Carter’s home. Despite the original intentions of the 
planners, Lehman remembers that the visit “could not possibly have been 
more conspicuous.” 3 

The first CIA session was highly publicized for another reason as 
well—it was sandwiched into a week filled with other high-level briefings 
of the nominee. The Agency’s presentation occurred on Wednesday, 
28 July, preceded by a discussion of defense issues that lasted most of the 
day Monday, and a session with leading economists on Tuesday. Thursday 
was dedicated to a foreign policy presentation by Secretary of State Henry 
Kissinger. Commenting on this series of briefings in 1993, Carter remem¬ 
bered especially “the value of Secretary Kissinger’s whole day of brief¬ 
ings.” 

Carter himself drew added press attention to the Agency briefing by 
discussing it at some length with reporters the day before. On Tuesday the 
Governor informed newsmen that “he had asked the CIA to brief him on 
confidential information concerning Lebanon and the Middle East, Rho¬ 
desia, South Africa, and South Korea, plus the interrelationships between 


3 Richard Lehman, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 10 March 1993. Unless other¬ 
wise indicated, subsequent comments are also from this interview. 


107 



the United States, the Soviet Union, and China.” 4 He piqued reporters’ 
interest by volunteering that he had not decided whether he would replace 
Bush as CIA Director if he were elected president. The Governor noted 
that Bush had previously been involved in Republican politics but added 
that he “has brought the CIA a good background as former United Nations 
Ambassador and US representative to China.” Carter added his choice for 
CIA head would be a person “with stature with the American people, 
whose integrity was beyond doubt and with some analytic ability.” 

CIA’s session with Carter began about 1:00 p.m. and continued with¬ 
out interruption for a full six hours, adjourning about 7:00 p.m. 5 The ses¬ 
sion included a current intelligence review of world trouble spots: 
Lebanon, Iraqi-Syrian relations, strains between Egypt and Libya, the Tai¬ 
wan Straits, Rhodesia, the Cuban presence in Angola, and developments 
in Uganda. These subjects were covered in approximately 30 minutes. 
The bulk of the afternoon was devoted to a discussion of Soviet strategic 
programs and the status of the SALT talks. 

Bush made some brief introductory comments, but most of the brief¬ 
ing was delivered by two Agency experts in strategic systems, Howard 
Stoertz and Ray McCrory. The two provided a detailed description of 
Soviet forces for intercontinental nuclear attack and for nuclear attack on 
the Eurasian periphery. Their presentation focused also on Soviet strategic 
defense capabilities and US estimates of long-term prospects for the stra¬ 
tegic balance. An ensuing discussion of SALT compliance issues was very 
detailed; it included a description of how monitoring was carried out and 
how the process worked within the US Government for determining 
whether a violation had occurred. Participants from the Agency were sur¬ 
prised that the discussion of strategic issues went on so long that they 
were forced to jettison plans to discuss Soviet political developments, for¬ 
eign policy, and the state of the Soviet economy. 

Carter was a very careful and interested listener and an active partici¬ 
pant. All who were present remember that he asked a great many ques¬ 
tions, often in minute detail. He was especially interested in the nature of 
the Intelligence Community’s evidence, including satellite photography of 
deployed Soviet weapons. The Governor asked detailed questions about 
the obligations of the USSR and the United States under the interim 
agreement and about the truth of the charges being made in the press that 
the Soviets were violating SALT I understandings. 

Carter’s running mate, Senator Walter “Fritz” Mondale, also attended 
the briefing. He was especially interested in the role and knowledge of the 
Congress in arms control issues. He wanted to understand precisely 

4 Associated Press, 28 July 1976. 

5 Richard Lehman, Memorandum for the Record, “First Briefing of Governor Carter,” 29 July 
1976. 


108 



whether the Soviets were justified in any of their charges that the United 
States had violated the SALT I agreement. Mondale also was well 
informed about and sensitive to the specific issue of whether Minuteman 
missile shelters constituted a violation of the interim agreement. 

A different set of questions from Mondale caused the CIA Director 
some concern because they raised sensitive policy issues. In some cases 
his queries related to ongoing CIA relationships with foreign liaison ser¬ 
vices or the Agency’s operations. Lehman noted in a Memorandum for the 
Record some days after the July briefing that he had informed Carter aide 
Eizenstat that the DCI had been uncomfortable with some of Mondale’s 
questions, particularly those concerning covert action. 6 Lehman explained 
that the Director felt that answering these questions would go beyond the 
guidelines set by President Ford. He underscored that the DCI hoped to 
avoid being put in the position of having to refuse to answer certain ques¬ 
tions. 

Carter, Mondale, and Eizenstat left with Agency officers a number of 
factual questions that there had not been time to discuss during the brief¬ 
ing. Lehman provided Eizenstat answers to some of these questions by 
telephone; others were simply lost in the press of business. One matter 
about which Carter asked showed he had studied carefully the foreign pol¬ 
icy issues in which John Kennedy had become involved during his candi¬ 
dacy some 16 years earlier. That issue related to Taiwan and the offshore 
islands. Lehman consulted in Washington before articulating precisely for 
the Governor what the US commitment was to defending Quemoy, Matsu, 
and certain other territories. In fact, this issue, which had been so impor¬ 
tant in the 1960 campaign, did not play a significant role in 1976. 

Agency officers were pleased when Eizenstat informed Lehman on 
29 July, the day following the initial session, that Carter had been 
“extremely pleased with the briefings.” In response to Lehman’s question, 
Eizenstat indicated the Governor had no suggestions for any changes in 
the format, the level of detail, or the length of the briefings, having 
described them as just right. Senior Agency officers had been anxious, 
unable to believe that Carter really wanted to sit through six hours of non¬ 
stop briefings. The participants had been impressed not only with the 
Governor’s endurance and interest but with the hospitality he and Mrs. 
Carter had shown them. They were particularly touched that Mrs. Carter 
brought in a bowl of peaches in the late afternoon, a welcome diversion 
after several hours of briefings. 

The second major preelection briefing of Carter took place in Plains 
two weeks later on 12 August. At least in the memory of one working- 
level officer who took part, the most dramatic and memorable moment 


Richard Lehman, Memorandum for the Record, “Conversation with Stuart Eizenstat,” 3 August 
1976. 


109 



occurred not during the session with Carter himself but during the heli¬ 
copter flight from Fort Benning to Plains. Asked if he had had a difficult 
flight, he remembered, “Not at all. It was fine. The problem was that dur¬ 
ing the short flight I realized I had left my briefing materials back in the 
Operations Center at Headquarters. It was your worst nightmare, going 
with the Director to brief the man who may be the next president and for¬ 
getting your materials.” 

The rattled briefers were further shaken when they arrived. With 
some time to spare before they were due at Carter’s home, they visited the 
Carter campaign headquarters where they were introduced to the Gover¬ 
nor’s mother, Lillian Carter. Upon meeting the CIA officers, Mrs. Carter 
volunteered that she understood “Jimmy was going to clear the govern¬ 
ment of all vestiges of Republicans, including CIA Director Bush.” Her 
plainspoken prediction reflected progressively more pointed comments 
the candidate had been making to the press about the possibility of replac¬ 
ing key government officials, including Bush. 

Bush himself was realistic and outwardly relaxed about the likeli¬ 
hood that he would be replaced, joking about it with his CIA colleagues. 
The latter were more apprehensive about the prospect that, if their boss 
were replaced, the job would be “politicized.” They were acutely aware 
that the four previous presidents had not appointed a new Director of Cen¬ 
tral Intelligence when they came into office. The last such occasion had 
been Dwight Eisenhower’s appointment of Allen Dulles 24 years earlier. 

Having learned in the first session that Carter was likely to ask 
numerous and detailed questions, Bush brought eight CIA officers with 
him to the second briefing to ensure that the team could handle any sub¬ 
ject the Governor might raise. Carter again asked that Mondale be present 
and this time also included Eizenstat and Mondale’s foreign policy aide, 
David Aaron. Aaron’s inclusion, at Carter’s request, helped relieve an 
awkward situation. Aaron had shown up at the first session but had not 
been permitted to attend, as his role was unclear. In time, he was to 
become the Deputy National Security Adviser. Zbigniew Brzezinski had 
not yet been named National Security Adviser and did not attend any of 
the briefing sessions. 

The substantive issues discussed during the second session related 
primarily to the status of Soviet conventional forces and to developments 
in China. In addition, an overview of current developments was provided 
that focused on Greek-Turkish tensions, strains between Egypt and Libya, 
a recent Rhodesian raid into Mozambique, the problems of Somalia and 
Djibouti, a recent exchange of fire across the Korean demilitarized zone, 
and civil strife in Lebanon. There was also considerable discussion, as at 


110 



the first briefing, of Soviet strategic programs and arms control negotiat¬ 
ing issues. The status of the Soviets’ Backfire bomber and SS-X-20 mis¬ 
sile programs was carefully reviewed. 7 

Obviously feeling more relaxed than he had in the earlier session, 
Bush led off this second exchange with some more expansive general 
comments and introductions of the other participants. Throughout the dis¬ 
cussions he made occasional comments, using to advantage his experi¬ 
ence as US representative in Beijing. Carter was again a very active 
participant with so many questions and comments that the briefers were 
unable to cover the requested topics, even though the session lasted from 
11:00 a.m. until almost 5:00 p.m. 

One of the participants remembers, “I was impressed with Carter. He 
was a very, very quick study, able to digest immediately everything we 
gave him—fact after fact. He seemed to have a photographic memory and 
would often repeat back to us the points we had made to be absolutely 
sure that he understood. He used his very detailed questions to be certain 
he understood the nuances, which he described with precision when he 
rephrased the points we had made.” 8 The CIA participants, arrayed in a 
circle in Carter’s family room, watched with fascination as the Governor, 
from his corner of the room, would spin the globe next to his chair as if to 
allow it to determine the country about which he would ask next. By the 
time the afternoon was over they felt they had covered the world. 

In addition to pleasing his visitors with his obvious interest in the 
substance of their business, Carter was a more relaxed host during the sec¬ 
ond session. He adjourned the proceedings for an hour or so while Mrs. 
Carter served lunch. The participants, during the break, spelled one 
another playing with Amy Carter and her cat on the couch. 

Toward the end of the briefing, Mondale made an unsolicited contri¬ 
bution that greatly pleased the Agency officers in attendance. In remarks 
seemingly directed both to Carter and Bush, Mondale expressed his 
respect for the Agency. He said CIA had reformed itself completely over 
the last two years, underscoring that this was a remarkable achievement 
for any government organization. Mondale was referring, of course, to the 
efforts undertaken by CIA Directors William Colby and George Bush in 
the wake of the revelations of CIA misdeeds that had been so widely pub¬ 
licized in the early 1970s. The Senator’s background enabled him also to 
make some perceptive and useful comments about the nature of Congres¬ 
sional review of the Intelligence Community and its budget. 


7 Richard Lehman, Memorandum for the Record, “Briefing of Governor Carter, 12 August 
1976,” 16 August 1976. 

s Wayne Wolfe, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 13 December 1993. 


Ill 



Like candidates before and after them, Carter and Mondale were 
shown and took an interest in certain unique CIA products. They were 
each given copies of an Agency compilation of foreign, particularly 
Soviet, press commentary on their candidacies. Carter was interested in 
studying some sample satellite photography showing much of southwest 
Georgia. The Governor seemed to find tracking the geography of his 
home region a useful technique for understanding the capabilities of the 
imaging system. 

Reflecting the Governor’s insatiable interests, the Carter team had 
provided CIA in advance of the briefing a list of 44 specific questions that 
they hoped could be answered. A few of the questions raised delicate pol¬ 
icy and operational issues, just as Mondale’s questions had done two 
weeks earlier. Because the President had not approved the Agency’s dis¬ 
cussion of these matters before the election, the Director reiterated the 
ground rules at the outset of the briefing. 

In fact, by the time the group turned to the list of 44 questions late in 
the afternoon, time was running out and the awkward issue of political 
delicacy did not have to be faced directly. Lehman recorded in his Memo¬ 
randum for the Record that “I was able to give very brief, often one-sen¬ 
tence answers.. .this moved so fast that our listeners were unable to check 
our replies against their list of questions, probably a highly desirable 
thing.” As Lehman’s comment implied, at the time it seemed sensible 
simply to stick to the essential facts and avoid addressing the complicated 
policy issues, but the matter was not that simple and did not go away. 

Not only did the problem persist, it returned within a week, precipi¬ 
tated by events in Korea. On 18 August a donnybrook over the removal of 
a tree from the demilitarized zone dramatically raised tensions on the Pen¬ 
insula. In the days following that incident, Carter received a number of 
questions from the press regarding his position on Korea and asked Eizen- 
stat to call Lehman and request a briefing on the situation. The available 
facts were fairly straightforward, and it was decided that a formal briefing 
was unnecessary. A senior Agency analyst, John Whitman, briefed Eizen- 
stat by telephone regarding developments in North Korea and the Chinese 
and Soviet reactions. 

Understandably in the circumstances, Eizenstat was interested also in 
the status of US forces and in the US reaction to the heightened tensions. 
He was reminded that the President’s guidelines provided that the Agency 
should brief only on foreign developments and not on US policy or 
actions. Eizenstat was asked if he had channels to the Departments of 
State and Defense that he could use to acquire the information that Carter 
needed. On hearing that such channels did not exist, Whitman suggested 
that he or Carter might wish to contact Scowcroft. Eizenstat responded 
that the Governor did not want to approach Scowcroft “lest he (Carter) 
become enmeshed.” 


112 



Whitman recorded in a Memorandum for the Record that Eizenstat 
appreciated the prompt telephone update on Korea and that their exchange 
on the ground rules of CIA’s liaison with the Carter team was an amiable 
one. 9 Whitman also recorded that “It is nevertheless clear that, since we 
are their only official channel to the Executive Branch, dicey moments 
may occur in the future.” In many similar circumstances over the years, 
CIA was to be the only authorized ongoing link between a sitting adminis¬ 
tration and a presidential candidate or president-elect of the other party. 
Agency officers have cherished such opportunities, in part, for their 
implicit acknowledgment that CIA can be trusted to provide information 
in a nonpolitical manner. At the same time, however, they have often had 
concerns about whether this exclusive system might not unduly limit an 
incoming administration. 

Before the end of August 1976, separate briefings were also given 
the two. vice-presidential candidates. On 23 August, Bush and seven 
senior Agency experts briefed Ford’s running mate, Senator Robert Dole, 
in a comprehensive session that covered Soviet strategic programs and 
conventional forces. The group also informed Dole of current intelligence 
related to the Korea crisis, tensions between Egypt and Libya, and devel¬ 
opments in South Africa and Rhodesia. The Senator’s questions related 
primarily to the military strengths of the two sides in Korea. 10 

On 24 August, Whitman provided a briefing to Mondale and Aaron 
that focused primarily on Soviet ICBM dismantling and destruction. He 
also covered developments in Korea and answered a number of questions 
from the Senator related to US satellite reconnaissance capabilities. On 
this occasion, Aaron raised with Whitman the possibility of the Agency 
providing another briefing along the lines of those given in Plains, this 
time focusing on the Middle East and southern Africa. Given Carter’s 
heavy schedule, the two discussed the possibility of providing such a 
briefing in Washington to Mondale, Aaron, and Eizenstat, 11 but there was 
no time available in the campaign schedule and the Carter-Mondale team 
received no further intelligence briefings until after the election on 
3 November. 

In the 1976 campaign there were three 90-minute debates between 
candidates Ford and Carter. The resumption of debates during a presiden¬ 
tial campaign after a 16-year hiatus raised concerns in the minds of senior 
Agency executives, who had an all-too-clear memory of how CIA had 
been caught up in the controversial issues raised in the Kennedy-Nixon 
encounters in 1960. In July and August 1976, Agency officers were 


g John Whitman, Memorandum for the Record, “Inquiry from Governor Carter on Korea,” 20 
August 1976. 

1(1 John Whitman, Memorandum for the Record, “Briefing of Senator Dole,” 24 August 1976. 

11 John Whitman, Memorandum for the Record, “Conversation with Senator Mondale,” 

24 August 1976. 


113 



heartened by Carter’s repeated reassurances that he did not want to take 
political advantage of intelligence briefings and statements and that he 
wanted only to understand the facts to avoid making mistakes. 

In fact, two of the three presidential debates included virtually no 
discussion of foreign policy issues. The debate on 23 September in Phila¬ 
delphia focused on domestic and economic policy matters. The debate on 
22 October in Williamsburg, Virginia, contained only a very brief 
exchange on Yugoslavia, including specifically the question of the appro¬ 
priate US response to a possible post-Tito Soviet invasion of that country. 
The remainder of that debate addressed domestic issues. 

The one debate dedicated to foreign and defense issues was held on 
6 October in San Francisco. Agency officers were relieved that the CIA 
and its programs did not become a big part of any of the key subjects dis¬ 
cussed. These included US leadership abroad, the proper level for the US 
defense budget, the US position for future SALT talks, cooperation with 
authoritarian regimes, grain sales to the Soviet Union, arms sales and 
peace negotiations in the Middle East, energy policy, proliferation, and the 
future of the Panama Canal. 

CIA was mentioned only twice during the debate, both times by 
Carter as part of his comments on integrity and leadership in foreign 
affairs. Early in the debate the Governor said, “I’ve traveled the last 21 
months among the people of this country. I’ve talked to them and I’ve lis¬ 
tened. And I’ve seen at first hand in a very vivid way the deep hurt that 
has come to this country in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia, Chile 
and Pakistan, and Angola and Watergate, the CIA revelations.” There 
could be no doubt that he had carefully planned this formulation: he used 
almost exactly the same words more than an hour later in his closing state¬ 
ment, saying, “And we’ve been hurt in recent years in this country in the 
aftermath of Vietnam, Cambodia, Chile, Pakistan, Angola, Watergate, 
CIA.” 12 

From the Agency’s point of view, Carter’s formulation was unfortu¬ 
nate. At the same time, there was relief that he had made only passing ref¬ 
erences, that the Intelligence Community’s activities had not become a 
bigger issue in the campaign, and that the Agency’s operations and analy¬ 
ses had not become entwined in discussion of the substantive issues. 
Thinking back on this specific issue in 1993, Carter commented that, in 
his mind, “Politicization of intelligence was not a problem in the debates 
or otherwise.” 


12 The New York Times, 7 October 1976, p. 36. 



Operational and Political Issues Arise 

Three days following the election on 2 November, Bush telephoned 
Carter to offer his congratulations and tender his resignation as CIA 
Director. Bush told Carter frankly that he was unclear about the protocol 
in such a situation and asked if the President-elect would like a letter of 
resignation. Carter graciously said that was not necessary and thanked 
Bush for his call. 13 

In the telephone conversation, Bush proposed they get together soon 
so he could inform Carter about certain “exotic and very closely held 
items relating to sources and methods.” Bush informed Carter of the kinds 
of support CIA had offered past presidents-elect during periods of transi¬ 
tion, describing specifically the office that had been set up for Nixon in 
New York in 1968. In reply, the new President-elect said that he would be 
very interested in having such a session. The two resolved to leave the 
arrangements to Lehman and Eizenstat, as they had done for the preelec¬ 
tion briefings. 

The one postelection session with Carter that Bush chaired was held 
on 19 November. This meeting was another multihour session in which 
Bush was assisted by a half-dozen senior officers. The most significant 
discussions of the day, however, were in the first 45 minutes, during which 
Bush met privately with Carter and Mondale, accompanied only by his 
personal assistant, Jennifer Fitzgerald. This group of four assembled in the 
little-used small living room in the Carter home while the larger group of 
aides from both sides waited in the larger and more informal study. 

Bush informed Carter that he wanted to discuss a personal matter and 
reopened the question of the CIA directorship. The DCI reminded Carter 
that there had been charges of politics when Bush was nominated to head 
CIA and that he, Bush, felt that if he were to leave at the end of the Ford 
presidency there might well be another political outcry. He elaborated, 
stating that, if he were seen to have done a reasonable job, the charge 
could be made that replacing him had politicized the Agency. Bush volun¬ 
teered that he could be helpful in muting such criticism. He added that any 
CIA Director needed to have direct access to the President and cited occa¬ 
sions when he had used such access to President Ford. Later Bush 
recorded that, after “weighing both the political problem and the confi¬ 
dence/direct access problem that I felt clearly that I should leave and the 
President-elect should put his own man in the organization in whom he 
had confidence.” 14 


13 George Bush, Memorandum of Conversation, “President-Elect Jimmy Carter,” 6 November 
1976. 

14 George Bush, Memorandum of Conversation, 22 November 1976. 


115 



Whatever Bush’s intent may have been, his reopening the question of 
his own tenure clearly surprised Carter, who had thought the matter settled 
when Bush had telephoned him two weeks earlier. In 1993, Carter volun¬ 
teered that his impression from that exchange in 1976 was that “Bush 
wanted to be kept on as DCI.” Parenthetically and laughingly, he added, 
“If I had agreed to that (Bush) never would have become president. His 
career would have gone off on a whole different track!” 

Carter explained, “It would be good in general to have some overlap 
(of a DCI serving from one president to the next). But the job of DCI must 
be depoliticized. Bush was too political. That is why I selected Stan 
Turner. He didn’t want the job, he wanted to be CNO (Chief of Naval 
Operations).” 

Carter was unambiguous in his response after Bush finished his dis¬ 
cussion of the pros and cons of his staying on as Director. The DCI had 
finished with an observation that—all things considered—he probably 
should be replaced. The President-elect, according to Bush, “simply said 
‘Okay,’ or something like this, with no discussion, no questions about any 
of the points I had made.... As in the rest of the briefing, Carter was very 
cold or cool, no editorializing, no niceties, very business-like.” Bush also 
noted that Mondale at this point “spoke up and rather generously said that 
things had gotten better since I’d been there....” The three concluded with 
a discussion of the timing of the announcement of a new CIA Director- 
designate. 

Given Carter’s expressed views on the politicization issue, senior 
Agency officers later found it ironic that his first choice for CIA Director 
was Theodore Sorensen, the former Kennedy political adviser and speech- 
writer. Sorensen was nominated on 24 December but in mid-January with¬ 
drew his name because of mounting criticism that he had played a very 
political role in the Kennedy administration. 

His private session with Carter gave Bush the opportunity to inform 
the President-elect of a variety of sensitive human-source and technical 
collection programs. In the first such session since Kennedy was briefed 
by Allen Dulles on covert action activities in Cuba, the DCI took 30 min¬ 
utes or more to inform Carter of specific operational undertakings he 
needed to be aware of early in his presidency. He also showed Carter and 
Mondale samples of reporting from sensitive sources, underscoring that 
the lives of CIA assets were literally at stake. Bush underscored that if the 
President-elect felt he needed additional information he could, of course, 
contact CIA. 

The DCI also used the occasion of the small group meeting to show 
the President-elect a copy of the President's Daily Brief. He described the 
distribution of the publication and informed Carter that President Ford had 
approved providing it to him on a daily basis starting immediately. This 
subject was to be discussed further in the larger briefing session. 


116 




President Jimmy Carter welcomes DCI-designate Adm. Stansfield Turner. Under 
Turner, the President’s Daily Brief remained the principal medium for conveying 
current intelligence to the President while the DCTs twice-weekly briefings focused 
on deeper and longer range concerns. 


In all, Bush described to the President-elect more than a dozen sensi¬ 
tive CIA programs and issues. At the time of the briefing, and when dis¬ 
cussing it some 17 years after the fact. Bush was puzzled that Carter had 
virtually no comment and asked no questions during the whole session. 
He had not indicated whether he thought the operations were good or bad, 
or that he was surprised or not surprised. He asked for no follow-up action 


117 













or information. Bush commented that Carter “seemed a little impatient, he 
didn’t say much but seemed to be a little turned off. He tended to moral¬ 
ize.” 15 

In fact, Carter was “turned off’ and uncomfortable with many of the 
Agency’s sensitive collection programs. He ordered some discontinued 
during the brief period when Henry Knoche served as Acting Director 
from late January to early March 1977. There was only one item raised in 
the discussion of sensitive matters between Bush and Carter to which the 
President-elect reacted positively. Somewhat incongruously. Bush had 
taken with him to Plains a letter to the President-elect from John Harper, 
rector of St. John’s Episcopal Church in Washington, DC, inviting Presi¬ 
dent Carter to worship there. Without a moment’s thought, the President¬ 
elect said that he felt sure he would be able to do this. 

Bush was obviously relieved when the smaller session was finished 
and he and Carter joined the larger group for the substantive briefings. 
The DCI recorded that Carter, in the larger session that followed, “was 
very attentive, listening intently and showing much more warmth in the 
bigger meeting than in the smaller.... He called the briefers by their first 
names. Actually, he referred to me a little more in this briefing than he did 
in the earlier ones where I had the distinct feeling he was somewhat 
uncomfortable with my being there.” 

During the larger group session on the afternoon of 19 November, 
Carter and Mondale were briefed on the US Intelligence Community in 
more detail than had been given any other president-elect before or since. 
Recalling the session in 1993, Bush said “I felt that a President-elect 
should get a formal briefing early on how intelligence works—what the 
assets are, what’s available real time, methodology, sources and methods 
protection, etc.” If Bush was the inspiration for the session, the bulk of the 
actual briefing was by Knoche, then Deputy Director of Central Intelli¬ 
gence, and Adm. Daniel Murphy, Director of the Intelligence Community 
Staff. 

The two primary briefers discussed the priorities and budget of the 
Intelligence Community and the array of satellites and aircraft that com¬ 
prised its technical intelligence reconnaissance program. There was con¬ 
siderable discussion of the CIA’s management of its covert action 
programs. Knoche ensured that the Governor was aware of the procedures 
involved with authorizing such programs, including the Director’s author¬ 
ities, the role of the Operations Advisory Group and the oversight respon¬ 
sibilities of the Congress. He discussed CIA’s clandestine intelligence 
collection efforts and showed the Governor examples of some of the tech¬ 
nical collection gear used by CIA assets abroad. Knoche also spent some 


15 George Bush, interview by the author in Kennebunkport, Maine, 6 May 1993. 


118 



time discussing the Agency’s unique contacts with foreign leaders and 
how CIA activities abroad are coordinated with the US ambassador in the 
country concerned. 

The group reviewed the history of the CIA from the time of the 
Office of Strategic Services, emphasizing how intelligence priorities, pro¬ 
grams, and resource levels had evolved through the decades of the 1950s 
and 1960s and until 1976. As a result of this extended discussion, Carter 
came to the presidency with a more detailed understanding of the capabil¬ 
ities and activities of the US Intelligence Community than any previous 
president had possessed at that early stage. 

During the afternoon session there was also a discussion of selected 
substantive issues in which Carter had specifically indicated an interest. 
These included the politics of OPEC and the international petroleum situ¬ 
ation. As in the preelection sessions, the Agency’s Director of Current 
Intelligence provided an update on crisis areas: Lebanon, the Arab-Israeli 
situation, the Horn of Africa, Rhodesia, and Soviet-Polish tensions. The 
Governor was also provided an oral briefing and written information 
regarding Soviet views and statements on the incoming Carter administra¬ 
tion, specifically related to the politics of arms control. 16 

Throughout the day, Carter continued to be an active participant in 
the discussions; he and Mondale both had numerous comments and ques¬ 
tions about the Soviet topics. They had received communications from 
Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev and Ambassador Dobrynin and were 
interested in discussing the meaning and implications of those messages. 
The President- and Vice President-elect repeatedly sought to clarify 
whether one dared rely on Soviet statements. Bush and Lehman, a long¬ 
time CIA Soviet expert, came away from the session pleased at the depth 
of Carter’s interest in Soviet matters. They appreciated the perceptive 
questions he asked but also thought he had some decidedly naive and 
unrealistic ideas about the Soviet Union. Lehman recalled in 1993 that, 
while Carter clearly understood the issues in an abstract way, he “obvi¬ 
ously had no comprehension of the Soviet system as it actually worked. 
Later, when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, it was as if the scales had 
dropped from his eyes.” 

Lehman at one point offered to have Agency specialists prepare a 
paper for Carter on the subject of how the Soviet system worked. Back in 
Washington, with the paper in preparation, Lehman was discouraged 
when Mondale adviser Aaron called “with glee” to report that the Presi¬ 
dent-elect had declined to have the paper prepared after all. Unintention¬ 
ally, perhaps, senior Agency officers had got themselves in the middle of 


lfi Richard Lehman, Memorandum for the Record, “Briefing of the President-elect,” 19 Novem¬ 
ber 1976. 


119 



some delicate maneuvering among Carter’s advisers regarding who would 
have the new president’s ear regarding how he should look at the Soviet 
Union and its leaders. 

The last item of the day was to clarify with the Governor whether he 
wished to receive the PDB on a daily basis in Plains. Bush had extended 
President Ford’s offer during their private session several hours earlier, 
and Carter apparently had been pondering it throughout the afternoon 
briefings. When Lehman raised the question again before their departure, 
Carter accepted Ford’s offer and said the sample copy that had been 
shown him looked useful. Lehman noted that, although Aaron objected— 
presumably because he would not be present—the decision was made to 
station a CIA officer in Plains to provide the PDB. This daily support 
began on 29 November. 

Knoche, the most active player on the Agency’s side, came away 
from the 19 November session predicting that “we will find a good cus¬ 
tomer and champion of intelligence during Carter’s incumbency in the 
White House.” Lehman recorded that “the general tone of the entire ses¬ 
sion was extremely friendly and as intense as the previous ones.” For his 
part, the President-elect, during an unusual public session with the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee, said on 23 November: “President Ford has 
been very gracious to me in letting me meet with his key leaders.... I have 
had a complete briefing from the CIA which will be set up on a daily basis 
from now on.” 17 

With Carter having clarified his intention to replace Bush as DCI 
during the 19 November meeting, the Director on 24 November publicly 
announced his resignation. To no one’s surprise, the novelty of a newly 
elected president promptly replacing the CIA Director led the press to 
read the most ominous possible interpretation into the announcement. 
Evans and Novak, for example, opined that “the departure of George Bush 
from the CIA sooner than anybody expected...stems from the nature of 
his encounter with President-elect Carter during the transition.” The jour¬ 
nalist team wrote that “Bush’s six-hour intelligence briefing of Carter at 
Plains on November 19 was called a ‘disaster’ by one Carter insider.” 
They cited a “key Carterite” as telling them that “Jimmy just wasn’t 
impressed with Bush.” 18 

The Evans-Novak article appeared on a Saturday morning. By mid¬ 
afternoon, Jody Powell telephoned Bush to report that Carter had asked 
him to pass along his feeling that the article was all nonsense (in fact 
using a more graphic term to characterize the nonsense). Powell expressed 
Carter’s very high regard for Bush and indicated the President-elect would 


17 Jimmy Carter, “President-elect Jimmy Carter’s Views Concerning Foreign Policy,” Briefing 
Before the Committee on Foreign Relations, U S. Senate, 23 November 1976. 

18 Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, The Washington Post, 27 November 1976. 


120 



be making a statement personally to set the record straight. At the same 
time, Aaron telephoned Knoche to pass along much the same message and 
to underscore that Carter was very high on CIA. Agency personnel were 
heartened on 29 November when Carter released a statement describing as 
“completely untrue” reports that he was displeased with the caliber of the 
briefings he had received from the outgoing CIA Director. Powell added 
on that date that Carter had found the briefings “professional, competent, 
and most helpful.” 19 

In discussing the sessions during an interview in 1994, Ambassador 
Mondale recalled that Carter had been particularly fond of the briefings 
and focused on the material “with extraordinary intensity.” He remem¬ 
bered with a smile that “a fellow named George Bush came down” to 
Plains to guide them through “stacks of maps and graphs and other data.” 
Mondale observed that he and Carter found the sessions “extremely useful 
in helping to understand the realities of foreign events at the time.” 20 

A final briefing session was held in Plains on 3 December, without 
the DCI and the large contingent of experts. Lehman recalls, “I traveled to 
Plains alone. It was pouring rain, there was a cordon of Secret Service at 
the Governor’s home and he was in the house alone; no servants, no staff, 
nobody. For two and a half hours we roamed over a wide range of intelli¬ 
gence business and certain substantive issues.” Two additional sessions 
were held on 9 and 10 December at Blair House in Washington, DC. 
Lehman was also the briefer at these sessions, which were abbreviated but 
included the usual mix of agenda items touching on intelligence opera¬ 
tions and developments abroad. Bush stopped by the session on 9 Decem¬ 
ber to give Carter a 20-minute update on a half-dozen sensitive 
operational developments and to inquire how the briefings were going. 
Carter expressed his satisfaction with the support he was receiving, 
including in Plains. He good-naturedly refused to be drawn out on who 
would be appointed DCI. 


Carter’s Use of the President’s Daily Brief 

Immediately after the Thanksgiving holiday, the Agency began to 
send the PDB to Carter in Plains on a daily basis. This established another 
precedent in terms of the level of support provided a president-elect dur¬ 
ing the transition period. Each morning at 6:30, a copy of exactly the same 
document that was about to be shown President Ford was faxed to Plains 


19 United Press International, 29 November 1976. 

20 Walter Mondale, interview by the author in Tokyo, Japan, 15 April 1994. 


121 



by the White House Communications Agency. At the Georgia end, CIA 
had stationed a midlevel officer who was responsible for receiving the 
document and delivering it to Carter personally at 8:00. 

The CIA officer who met with Carter was John Biddiscomb, an 
imagery specialist from the Directorate of Science and Technology. Bid¬ 
discomb was selected because he would be adept at answering any ques¬ 
tions Carter had on the satellite photography that was sent to Plains along 
with the text of the daily current intelligence items. It was not thought that 
the Agency should station a more senior substantive expert in Plains, in 
part, because Carter’s foreign affairs advisers were in Atlanta or Washing¬ 
ton and were uneasy at the prospect that the daily sessions might turn into 
extended substantive discussions in which they were not involved. 

Carter was a punctual and interested reader. He would arrive at his 
office each morning at 8:00 to meet Biddiscomb and would typically 
spend 30 to 45 minutes reading through the day’s current intelligence. 
Biddiscomb recalls that Carter always extended a warm welcome and was 
appreciative of the material made available to him. He showed particular 
interest in items on the Soviet Union and international petroleum mat¬ 
ters. 21 

As the weeks went along, Carter was sent a considerable volume of 
supplementary material in addition to the PDB. This material included 
biographies of key world leaders, more detailed information on crises 
abroad, and the reactions of foreign governments to the new US adminis¬ 
tration. When Carter had finished reading the PDB or other material, he 
would initial it with a “JC.” At the conclusion of each day’s session, Bid¬ 
discomb would telephone Lehman at CIA with feedback on Carter’s inter¬ 
ests and to pass along any questions that the Governor may have had. 

The Agency’s continuous presence in Plains gave it an unusual 
degree of access to the President-elect. The ground rules in Plains were 
that only Biddiscomb and Carter’s own appointments secretary had the 
authority to call him directly at any time. In fact, CIA did not exercise this 
prerogative of special access with the exception of one occasion on which 
Biddiscomb contacted Carter late one evening to pass along a message 
from Aaron in Washington. While Biddiscomb appreciated Carter’s gra¬ 
ciousness and the access he was granted, there was throughout the period 
a continuing formality to the early-morning sessions that did not really 
permit the establishment of a familiar relationship with the President¬ 
elect. 

The occasional light moments that occurred arose typically when 
Carter’s brother, Billy, would put in an appearance at the President-elect’s 
office. On one occasion Billy inquired of his brother whether he had per¬ 
mission to ask the CIA to “take care of some of these reporters” who were 

21 John Biddiscomb, telephone interview by the author, 28 April 1993, 


122 



becoming a bit oppressive. Ever cautious, the President-elect said “You’ll 
have to ask Mr. Biddiscomb about that.” Biddiscomb wisely replied that 
the Agency had its hands full dealing with reporters itself and probably 
could not be much help. In reality, Biddiscomb was relieved that the press 
contingent in Georgia showed very little interest in the CIA presence, 
once it had become clear that it was a routine daily operation that would 
result in no announcements to the press. He had made no particular efforts 
to avoid the press, which in any case would have been impossible in the 
setting. Not infrequently, for example, he found himself in a local restau¬ 
rant surrounded by reporters and Secret Service officers. On one occasion, 
the President-elect and his family were there as well. 

When Lehman briefed Carter in Plains on 3 December and during his 
visit to Washington on 9 December, the first item on his agenda was to 
elicit Carter’s reaction to the PDB and the supplementary material he had 
been receiving since Thanksgiving. 22 Lehman’s Memorandums for the 
Record make clear that Carter did not find the PDB satisfactory. The Gov¬ 
ernor was aware that no changes would be made until after his inaugura¬ 
tion on 21 January, but he underscored that he would expect changes, 
once that date arrived. Carter stressed that he was “a voracious reader of 
the press” and would prefer a publication that contained only items not 
covered in the newspapers. 

During their first discussion of the PDB format, Lehman left with 
Carter samples of PDBs that had been prepared for the last four presidents 
to illustrate some of the different options available. As a first step, Carter 
asked Lehman to experiment with the supplemental material, adding 
longer pieces with more background material. These were to include 
“insights into proposals that might be coming from other countries,” for 
example those relating to Middle East peace negotiations. Carter also 
asked on that date for additional biographical material on foreign leaders. 
Lehman left with him a collection of biographies on key Chinese officials. 

By the time Carter and Lehman met at Blair House on 10 December, 
it was obvious the President-elect was a little impatient that he would 
have to wait until January to receive the publications in the form that he 
preferred. A big part of the problem seemed to be that the PDB being pre¬ 
pared for the outgoing President appeared in a different format than the 
material prepared for the President-elect in the separate supplement. The 
Governor was reading both but was unhappy. Lehman’s reaction was to 
direct that for the next few weeks CIA should print the supplement in the 
same format as the PDB and transmit both to Plains at the same time and 


22 Richard Lehman, Memorandum for the Record, “Briefing of the President-elect,” 13 December 
1976. 


123 



as one package so that they would look alike to the Governor. Following 
the inauguration, the supplement could be dropped and all appropriate 
material published in the PDB in whatever format the Governor preferred. 

On 10 December, Lehman also took the opportunity to introduce 
David Peterson, the CIA officer responsible for the production of the 
PDB. Lehman indicated that Peterson would deliver the PDB to Governor 
Carter the next time he came to Washington. In his Memorandum for the 
Record, Lehman, obviously mindful of the Agency’s practice earlier in the 
Ford administration, noted that he hoped to develop a situation in which 
Peterson would be briefing the President every morning after the inaugu¬ 
ration, adding that he had not yet suggested this to the Carter entourage. 
During their first meeting, Carter remarked to Peterson that he liked the 
PDB but would want to talk with him further about its contents at a later 
time, probably after the inauguration. 23 

Carter seemed to enjoy and benefit from the substantive discussions 
held at Blair House during his visits to Washington in the transition 
period. In the presence of more senior Agency officers in Washington, he 
was considerably more expansive in his comments than he was during the 
daily current intelligence sessions in Plains. In these relatively informal 
and relaxed sessions, the President-elect was even able occasionally to 
find some humor in the intelligence he was provided, joking among other 
things about the positive statements Libyan President Qadhafi was making 
about the upcoming Democratic administration in Washington. Carter 
commented in 1993 that he remembered the Blair House sessions as being 
very useful to him—not only the briefings provided by CIA but also one 
given him by representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

The JCS briefers had met with Carter at Blair House to go over with 
him his responsibilities in the event of nuclear attack. Carter recalls taking 
particular pride in insisting that the Vice President-elect also receive this 
briefing in order to prepare for the eventuality that he might need to dis¬ 
charge those weighty responsibilities. To Carter’s knowledge, Vice Presi¬ 
dents had not previously been briefed in such a way. 

During the last of the Blair House sessions, Carter settled on a ver¬ 
sion of the PDB that he liked. The format he selected was notable prima¬ 
rily for the large amount of white space on the page—space in which he 
could write notes. On inauguration day, 20 January, Peterson met with 
Carter and presented him the first issue of the PDB printed in the new for¬ 
mat. 

With Bush having resigned effective 20 January, it fell to Acting DCI 
Knoche to meet with the new President and National Security Adviser 
Brzezinski the next day to brief them on a sensitive satellite collection 
capability that had not previously been discussed. On that occasion Carter 

23 David Peterson, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 4 March 1993. 


124 



affirmed to Knoche personally that he wanted him to act as DCI until a 
successor was confirmed (Sorensen by that time had withdrawn his 
name). Carter expressed his pride in CIA and indicated that Knoche had 
his full confidence. A bit more than two weeks later, on 5 February, Carter 
telephoned Knoche to inform him that Adm. Stansfield Turner would be 
nominated to be the next Director. 

Carter used the occasion of the first meeting of the National Security 
Council on 22 January to underscore to all attendees the importance of the 
PDB, which he thought had “sharpened in focus in recent days.” 24 Con¬ 
firming again that he had been disappointed by earlier versions that he 
found wordy and “no different from The New York Times” he asked 
Knoche to ensure that the publication continued to be “sharp and focused, 
brief and clear as to what the intelligence is.” Carter directed that Knoche 
should disseminate the PDB only to him, the Vice President, the Secretary 
of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the National Security Adviser, at 
the same time informing both Secretaries that their deputies would not 
receive it. 

Brzezinski and Aaron had not been seeing the PDB during the transi¬ 
tion period, so it fell to Peterson to talk with them following the inaugura¬ 
tion to familiarize them with the publication and procedures for 
distributing it. Carter had obviously been discussing his preferences with 
Brzezinski, because the latter reiterated Carter’s guidelines for the publi¬ 
cation, underscoring that it should not repeat material available in the 
newspapers. 

The new President quickly put into place a system for keeping him¬ 
self informed of developments abroad on a day-to-day basis that was very 
similar to the process used by Ford. That is, he preferred to start each 
morning with a one-on-one meeting with his National Security Adviser. 
Carter later wrote in his memoirs, “The PDB Zbig brought to me each 
morning was a highly secret document, distributed to only five peo¬ 
ple...Zbig and I would discuss the report and other developments relating 
to defense and foreign affairs. Often, while he was still present, I would 
call the Secretary of State or the Secretary of Defense on a secure tele¬ 
phone to obtain additional information or get their opinions. They, too, 
were early risers, always at their desks by seven o’clock.” 25 

The downside of this system from the CIA perspective was that the 
Agency’s briefing officer was not present when the President read through 
the day’s current intelligence. In discussing this set of procedures in 1993, 
Carter evinced awareness that the system he adopted had the effect of 
denying CIA immediate feedback on his reactions and questions, but 
made clear he thought good management demanded that he work through 

24 Henry Knoche, Memorandum for the Record, “PDB,” 24 January 1977. 

25 Jimmy Carter, Keeping Faith: Memoirs of a President (New York: Bantam Books, 1982) p. 55. 


125 




National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski and President Carter confer over the 
day's edition of the President’s Daily Brief. 


the National Security Adviser. Carter remembered, “Zbig was enough 
day-to-day. I read the PDB and the Secretary of State’s Morning Report. I 
wanted Brzezinski to draw to my attention things I needed to do some¬ 
thing about. If (Secretary of Defense) Harold Brown could handle a mat¬ 
ter and I didn’t need to be aware of it that was fine.” 

In fact, the CIA received considerably more feedback from Carter 
than it had from Ford. Heartening evidence that this would be the case 
appeared within days of the inauguration, because the President fre¬ 
quently wrote comments on his copy of the PDB. But this practice was to 
create another minor problem. 

Peterson would deliver the PDB to Brzezinski each morning, retrieve 
the previous day’s edition, and note down any reactions Carter may have 
expressed to Brzezinski. On 31 January, Brzezinski informed Peterson 
that he would no longer be able to return to the Agency the President’s 
copy of the PDB. 26 Brzezinski showed Peterson the issue for Saturday, 
29 January, on which the President had written several action directives 
and questions addressed to Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus 
Vance. Brzezinski decreed that these presidential notations demanded that 

26 David Peterson, Memorandum for the Record, “White House Copy of the PDB,” 31 January 
1977 . 


126 


















the original copies of the PDBs should be securely stored at the White 
House. CIA had no problem with this procedure because Brzezinski 
offered assurances that the Agency would be informed of the President’s 
annotations whenever his comments related to the substance of the intelli¬ 
gence. 

Peterson recalls that the President often wrote on the PDB and that 
the copies were shown to him as promised. Carter’s notations usually 
were instructions to his senior policymakers. Such directives obviously 
were properly the property of the President, the National Security Council 
staff, and the Departments of State and Defense. For planning purposes, 
however, it proved very useful to the Agency to be informed of these 
directives in order that timely and relevant intelligence could be provided 
to the President. 

In the months that followed, Carter initiated one other practice that 
was immensely valuable in keeping the CIA informed of his policy and 
intelligence interests and opened opportunities for the Intelligence Com¬ 
munity to provide useful service to the new President. When Turner took 
up the post of DCI in mid-March, he began—at the President’s invita¬ 
tion—a practice of personally providing Carter in-depth weekly briefings 
on a subject of particular interest. The Agency had not had such an oppor¬ 
tunity since the period when DCI “Beedle” Smith regularly briefed Presi¬ 
dent Harry Truman. The five intervening Presidents had been briefed in 
varying ways, sometimes frequently and in depth, but never in the system¬ 
atic way that the Agency was able to establish with Carter. 

In thinking back over the intelligence support he received, Carter in 
1993 recalled that he valued Turner’s briefings highly, even though they 
were later to slip from their regular weekly schedule. He noted that “From 
the daily material—the PDB—I selected the items I wanted discussed in 
more detail the next week by the DCI. I particularly remember the brief¬ 
ings I received on confessional and political groups in Lebanon, on a new 
imaging system, and on the South African nuclear program.” 

Carter began his presidency with a deep understanding of intelli¬ 
gence. He had received in-depth briefings on developments abroad and on 
the most sensitive operations of the US Intelligence Community. He had 
received daily current intelligence support—the PDB—during the transi¬ 
tion period that continued once he was in office. Throughout his presi¬ 
dency he received weekly substantive briefings. In the course of four 
years, Carter was to enjoy great foreign policy successes, like the Camp 
David accords, and to suffer great disappointments, as with the Iranian 
seizure of US hostages. Throughout it all, he received an unprecedented 
level of detailed intelligence information. 


127 




Chapter 6 


Reagan and Bush: A Study in Contrasts 


The 12-year period from 1980 to 1992 presented CIA with two presi¬ 
dents who were virtual polar opposites in terms of their familiarity with 
and use of intelligence. Governor Ronald Reagan of California had the 
least experience as a regular consumer of national-level intelligence of 
any president elected since CIA was founded; Ambassador George Bush, 
on the other hand, was completely familiar and comfortable with intelli¬ 
gence in a way that only a former Director of Central Intelligence could 
be. Reagan brought to the presidency deep convictions about key national 
security issues and felt the need for only limited, very general intelligence 
information. Bush approached developments abroad as a pragmatic activ¬ 
ist and expected from the Intelligence Community an unprecedented level 
of day-to-day support and detail. Both, however, received Agency officers 
warmly and were openly appreciative of their support., 

Before the election, candidate Reagan received only one intelligence 
briefing. It was held on 4 October 1980 at Wexford, a borrowed country 
estate near Middleburg, Virginia, where the Governor was staying for a 
period during the campaign. DCI Adm. Stansfield Turner, accompanied 
by three senior Agency officers, represented CIA. Reagan was accompa¬ 
nied by vice-presidential candidate George Bush; his transition chief of 
staff Ed Meese; campaign director William Casey; and Richard Allen, his 
adviser on national security matters. 

Participants in that first briefing remember it as “a circus.” The living 
room of the Middleburg home where the session was held was like a cha¬ 
otic movie set with chairs scattered more or less randomly about the room 
and people constantly coming and going. The Governor was an engaging 
host, but in the impossible setting it was extraordinarily difficult to make 
effective use of the briefing aids and other materials that Turner had 
brought with him. Throughout the meeting, which went on for approxi¬ 
mately one hour, the CIA participants had the feeling that the Reagan 
camp had accepted the briefing simply because it had been offered and 


129 



they had to do it. There was no evidence that anyone had the expectation 
that the Governor would engage in an in-depth review of the substantive 
issues. 

Even in these awkward circumstances there was some serious discus¬ 
sion of developments in the Middle East, the agreed focus of the session. 
Turner discussed the petroleum aspects of the issue and the conflicts 
between Iran and Iraq and in Afghanistan. National Intelligence Officer 
for the Middle East Robert Ames briefed on the internal politics of Saudi 
Arabia and Iran. Richard Lehman, from the National Intelligence Council, 
elaborated on the impact of the Iran-Iraq war on the region and on the 
Soviet role. 

Reagan posed a few questions to be sure that he understood the 
essential points the Agency was trying to make. He asked straightforward, 
common sense questions, primarily related to the oil situation. Agency 
participants were interested to observe that there was absolutely nothing 
ideological in the Governor’s approach and that no policy issues arose. 

Richard Allen asked the most questions, including some related to 
Afghanistan that put the CIA Director on the spot. In replying to a direct 
question from Allen about whether the US Government was engaged in 
supplying arms to the insurgents in Afghanistan, Turner felt obliged to be 
more elliptical than he would have preferred. The DCI left no doubt in the 
listeners’ minds that the United States was supporting the insurgents 
through Pakistan, but he also tried to make clear that this was a very sensi¬ 
tive covert action program that he was not in a position to describe in 
detail, inasmuch as the Governor was still a candidate for the presidency 
rather than President-elect. 

In recalling his exchange with Reagan in 1993, Turner commented 
that his reticence on the Afghan program had a serious substantive aspect 
as well. In early October 1980, the “Afghan story had not yet leaked and 
we were scared about Pakistan’s position.” 1 Turner’s concerns reflected 
the fact that, particularly during the early years of the Afghan conflict, the 
US Government was concerned lest Pakistan become the ultimate casu¬ 
alty of a US program, undertaken with vital Pakistani cooperation, to 
expel Soviet forces from Afghanistan. This concern for security had to be 
weighed against Turner’s larger motive in providing as much information 
as possible to Reagan “because we didn’t want him saying something he 
would regret if he became president.” 

The press had been informed in advance that Reagan would receive 
an intelligence briefing on the Middle East on 4 October. Reporters were 
eagerly awaiting the candidate’s reaction, knowing the briefing was poten¬ 
tially politically significant inasmuch as Reagan had previously criticized 


1 Stansfield Turner, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 20 April 1993. Subsequent quo¬ 
tations from Turner also come from this interview. 


130 



the Carter administration for its failure to have done more to support the 
late Shah of Iran. In fact, after the briefing, Reagan left it to Bush to dis¬ 
cuss the session with the press. The latter “called the discussion pure intel¬ 
ligence and said that neither he nor Mr. Reagan intended to use the 
information as ammunition to criticize President Carter.” 2 Bush added that 
he “was impressed with the information. I feel better informed about the 
world,” he told reporters. “I can’t tell you I feel more optimistic about it.” 
For his part, Reagan declined to discuss the briefing with newsmen, 
although he did characterize it as “most interesting.” 

The one presidential debate held during the 1980 campaign that 
involved the candidates of the major parties was held in Cleveland, Ohio, 
on 28 October, some three weeks after Reagan’s intelligence briefing. At 
least half of the 90-minute debate was devoted to developments abroad 
and US national security policy. The international portion of the debate 
was largely a discussion of Middle East issues: Arab-Israeli peace negoti¬ 
ations; Persian Gulf oil; the terrorist threat, specifically that from Iran 
related to the ongoing hostage crisis; the Iran-Iraq war; and weapons pro¬ 
liferation. Agency officers were relieved that during this extended discus¬ 
sion there was, unlike the situation four years earlier in 1976, no mention 
whatever of CIA. 

In response to a question from the moderator of the debate on what 
he might do to deal with terrorism, Reagan made clear that he did not 
want to “say anything that would inadvertently delay in any way the 
return of those hostages...” and that he was “fearful that I might say 
something that was presently underway or in negotiation and thus expose 
it and endanger the hostages.” He also made clear that he did not have 
“access to the information in which I would know all the options that are 
open.” 3 Senior Agency officers were not surprised that the Governor 
would handle the hostage issue this way during the debate; they had been 
struck—and remembered their reaction clearly in 1993—that there had 
been no discussion whatever of the hostage issue during their briefing of 
the candidate two weeks earlier. 

Ironically, in light of the highly charged politics of the hostage issue 
that would ensue in succeeding years, the only discussion of the issue that 
occurred during CIA’s formal briefings in the preelection period in 1980 
occurred not with Reagan but with third party candidate John Anderson. 
On Sunday afternoon, 5 October, Turner and three senior Agency officers 
spent two hours providing Anderson the same briefing on the Middle East 
that had been given to Reagan the previous day. In 1993, Turner recounted 
that on that occasion Anderson reported to him that he had been 


2 The New York Times , 5 October 1980, p. 34. 

3 The New York Times , 29 October 1980, p. A27. 


131 



approached by an Iranian intermediary who raised the possibility of an 
arms-for-hostages exchange with Iran. The DCI promptly reported this 
approach to the State Department and took no further action himself. 

Those involved in the briefing of Anderson recall it as a deeply sub¬ 
stantive and intellectual discussion that went on without interruption for 
more than two hours. Anderson impressed the Agency officers with a 
number of perceptive and informed questions. Turner recalled vividly the 
contrast between the Reagan and Anderson briefings, saying that he 
received “more sensible questions from Anderson than we got from the 
Reagan people.” 


Postelection Briefings 

In response to the Agency’s standing invitation, Reagan aide Ed 
Meese telephoned Turner some two weeks following the November elec¬ 
tion to arrange for intelligence support for the new President-elect. 
Although Reagan himself was to divide his time between Washington and 
California, his transition staff had set up offices in Washington, and it was 
decided that the Director’s follow-on briefings should be given in the cap¬ 
ital. As the scheduling worked out, these sessions occurred on 19 and 20 
November at the townhouse Reagan used as his headquarters on Jackson 
Place, near the White House. Briefings were also provided on 11 Decem¬ 
ber and 15 January at Blair House, the much larger and more elaborate 
presidential guest house across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White 
House. 

It was decided to devote the first of the postelection briefings to an 
update on the Middle East, inasmuch as it had been more than six weeks 
since the last meeting with Reagan in early October. In his opening 
remarks Turner described the structure and functions of the various ele¬ 
ments of the US Intelligence Community. He then turned the floor over to 
the Agency’s Assistant National Intelligence Officer for the Middle East, 
Martha Neff Kessler, who did the bulk of the substantive briefing. 

Thinking back on the session in 1993, Kessler remembered primarily 
how Turner, Lehman, and she were invited to join the President-elect and 
his staff around the dining room table of the Jackson Place townhouse, but 
that the room was already so crowded with Reagan aides that it was all but 
impossible to even sit down. The result was that while Kessler was able 
literally to rub elbows with Reagan and Bush simultaneously, she was 
unable to open the briefing book. She gave a more spontaneous and infor¬ 
mal briefing than might otherwise have been the case. 

In contrast to the briefing provided six weeks earlier, Kessler recalled 
that, in late November, Reagan was an active participant who posed a 
number of questions regarding Middle East peace issues. He focused on 


132 




boyhood had appeared as an extra in Hollywood films), one of two CIA officers who 
had provided transition briefings. 


the Golan Heights, Syrian and Palestinian politics, and relations among 
the various Middle East countries. According to Kessler, Reagan’s ques¬ 
tions “reflected considerable knowledge. He was by no means a rightwing 
ideologue as the press charged. He was very current and extremely alert.” 4 
Allen also asked a number of questions, and his often had an edge. Bush, 
who had been instrumental in setting up these sessions, made a number of 
comments elaborating on CIA activities. 

Participants in the briefing on 19 November remember it as one of 
the more notable cases when an analytic prediction provided to a Presi¬ 
dent came true. In the course of her discussion of the high stakes of the 
ongoing Middle East negotiations, Kessler remarked, “We could lose 
Sadat.” Reagan interrupted, “What do you mean, lose Sadat?” to which 
Kessler replied that he could be overthrown or killed. Her concerns were 
based on her assessment of the tensions in the region rather than on any 
specific intelligence reporting. Tragically, this premonition was to come to 
pass less than a year later, in October 1981. 

4 Martha Neff Kessler, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 30 March 1993. 


133 




















The session held the following day, 20 November, also took place in 
the crowded Jackson Place townhouse. It was to have been a review of the 
US-Soviet strategic force balance, the NATO-Warsaw Pact conventional 
force balance, the Soviet threat to Poland, and developments in Central 
America. In fact, no systematic briefing occurred at all. Instead, there was 
a general and relatively brief discussion of the Soviet threat to Poland and 
the situation in Central America. 

Reagan’s expressed interests during the session on 20 November 
included the relationship between the Soviets’ involvement in Eastern 
Europe and their ability to pursue their interests in other parts of the 
world. He was well informed on Mexico’s role in Central America, Cuba, 
and the region, attributing this to his California background. Concerning 
both Central America and Eastern Europe, the President-elect’s comments 
often addressed the policy aspects of what the United States was doing 
and should do. Obliged to demur on the policy questions, the CIA briefers 
came away concerned about whether they had been very helpful. 

By the time of the briefing on 11 December, the Reagan team had 
relocated its operation to Blair House, which provided a much better set¬ 
ting for an organized presentation. The Agency’s primary briefer on that 
occasion was Douglas Diamond, a specialist on the Soviet economy who 
had been one of the briefers of President Jimmy Carter in Plains four 
years earlier. Diamond later recalled that the briefing covered not only the 
Soviet economy, but also the implications of the economic situation for 
the USSR’s military programs, the US-Soviet strategic balance, and the 
Sino-Soviet situation. He found Reagan a friendly and interested recipient 
who raised a number of factual questions. On the other hand, Diamond 
also remembered in 1993 that “The sun certainly didn’t go down on this 
briefing like it had in Plains.” 5 It was brief, reflecting the dramatically 
contrasting styles of Reagan and Carter. Participants recall that Turner 
was careful to provide “a Ronald Reagan-type briefing, not a Carter brief¬ 
ing” in terms of the length and level of generality as well as its emphasis. 

The CIA Director’s briefings of the President-elect during November 
and December were made somewhat awkward by the running speculation 
in the media about whether Turner would be replaced and by whom. As 
the weeks passed, the press more and more frequently suggested that cam¬ 
paign director Casey would be appointed DCI. One attendee at the 
November briefings recalled that, in these ambiguous circumstances, 
Turner simply “talked as though he expected to be kept on as DCI.” 6 
Another remembered Casey saying to Turner, following one of the 
November briefings, “You are doing exactly the right thing” in proceeding 
as if he would stay on as DCI. 7 


5 Douglas Diamond, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 28 April 1993. 

6 Richard Lehman, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 10 March 1993. 

7 Kessler interview, 30 March 1993. 


134 



From the CIA perspective, it was never clear exactly when Reagan 
and Casey finally decided on the CIA directorship. Within a three-week 
period in November and December, Casey at first denied to Turner the 
press stories that he would become DCI; later, before the briefing of 
11 December, he telephoned Turner to confirm that indeed the press sto¬ 
ries were true. At the conclusion of the session on 11 December, Reagan 
informed Turner that the Casey nomination would be announced in a mat¬ 
ter of hours. 

Thinking back on the politics of the briefings and the CIA director¬ 
ship in 1993, Reagan recalled “My memory is of being completely satis¬ 
fied with the briefings I received during the transition.” But he also made 
clear that his satisfaction with the briefings had not for a moment led him 
to consider leaving the incumbent CIA Director in place. Reagan recalled 
emphatically that “I disagreed so completely with everything that Presi¬ 
dent Carter was doing that we thought a change was needed.” 8 

In discussing the more general question of how CIA had kept him 
aware of Agency programs, Reagan noted that he had always thought he 
received sufficiently detailed information on CIA’s activities. Specifically, 
he expressed appreciation for a briefing Turner provided the week before 
the inauguration on the Agency’s sensitive technical and human-source 
collection efforts and on some covert action programs. That briefing, con¬ 
ducted on 15 January, was a particularly important one because it came at 
a time when the Reagan team had been criticizing the outgoing Carter 
administration for its inaction in countering the Soviet threat worldwide. 
Inevitably, much of this criticism was born of ignorance, because Reagan 
and his advisers, before the DCI’s briefing, were unaware of the array of 
covert action and sensitive collection programs in place. 

Turner’s final briefing was provided only to Reagan, Bush, and 
Casey—by then DCI-designate—unlike the previous sessions that were 
attended by a large number of aides. The Director described seven differ¬ 
ent covert action programs and a dozen sensitive collection undertakings. 
One of the Director’s assistants later recalled hearing at the time that the 
recipients on that occasion had no idea of the number of programs that 
were in place and were extremely interested, especially in the Afghan pro¬ 
gram. Interestingly, in light of subsequent events, none of the participants 
in any of the formal, high-level briefings of Reagan during the transition 
remembers any discussion of the US hostages in Iran, nor do the classified 
records of those briefings indicate the issue was raised. 


8 Ronald Reagan, interview by the author in Los Angeles, California, 26 July 1993. Subsequent 
quotations from Reagan also come from this interview. 


135 




DCI William Caseys close campaign relationship with Ronald Reagan won him 
close and frequent access to the President hut also led him into controversial in¬ 
volvement in policy matters. 


As a result of the briefing on 15 January, Reagan—like Carter, but 
unlike all other postwar presidents to that time—had a thorough under¬ 
standing of CIA’s most sensitive activities at the time he became presi¬ 
dent. Ironically, Bush was responsible in both cases: he had briefed Carter 
personally in 1976 and had ensured that he and Reagan received such a 
briefing in 1981. Bush, with his unique perspective, was struck by the dif¬ 
fering reactions of the two presidents. Bush had noticed in 1976 that 
Carter showed no reaction when he was informed of the Agency’s sensi¬ 
tive programs; Reagan, on the other hand, supported them all enthusiasti¬ 
cally. 9 


A Higher Level of Daily Support 

Initially, it appeared doubtful that during the transition Reagan would 
accept the Agency’s offer of daily intelligence briefings on current devel¬ 
opments, as distinct from the more informal and occasional background 


9 George Bush, interview by the author in Kennebunkport, Maine, 6 May 1993. Subsequent 
quotes from Bush also come from this interview. 


136 







briefings. The President-elect was known to be apprehensive that the out¬ 
going President and his National Security Adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, 
would use such briefings to “put one over on him” and influence his future 
policies. In addition, several of Reagan’s key advisers doubted that he 
would learn anything from the briefings that he could not learn just as eas¬ 
ily from the newspapers. Fortunately, from CIA’s point of view, the Vice 
President-elect was aware of these feelings within the Reagan camp and 
was determined to counter them. His view was that the President-elect— 
indeed, any president-elect—badly needed the experience of reading a 
daily intelligence report with an Agency officer in attendance to supple¬ 
ment and explain the material. 

On Friday, 21 November, Reagan finished a week of briefings and 
meetings in Washington and departed for his home in Pacific Palisades, 
California. Bush rode with Reagan to the airport sendoff and used the 
occasion to urge the President-elect to accept daily intelligence briefings 
during the several weeks he would be in California. His appeal worked. A 
member of the Reagan staff telephoned from the Governor’s aircraft to 
ask that the Agency provide the President's Daily Brief { PDB), beginning 
the next morning in California. Richard Kerr, who was taking over the 
transition team from CIA’s longtime current intelligence chief, Richard 
Lehman, boarded a commercial flight to Los Angeles that evening. 

Kerr recalls a very warm welcome from Reagan when he appeared at 
midday on the 22nd to present the PDB and a short briefing. Kerr and a 
colleague, Dixon Davis, shared the duty of providing such briefings from 
22 November through 14 January 1981. They were interested that Reagan 
was almost always alone, or accompanied by a single staff assistant, dur¬ 
ing the period he was in California. The Reagan transition team was at 
work in Washington, and the candidate himself had a relatively relaxed 
and detached schedule. This was in marked contrast to most other transi¬ 
tions before and since. 

Reagan proved to be a thorough and very intent reader during the 
typically 20-minute sessions that he held with the CIA visitors. Always 
friendly and respectful, he nevertheless displayed a certain wariness 
regarding the intelligence material that the briefers interpreted as reflect¬ 
ing his lack of familiarity with it. Mrs. Reagan was almost always present 
in the home but normally did not join the Governor for the daily intelli¬ 
gence briefings. The first day was an exception; on that occasion she 
hosted a lunch for Kerr. In the weeks that followed, she frequently would 
pass through the room during the briefing. Mrs. Reagan seemed to have 
mixed feelings about the process, displaying some uneasiness that she was 
not privy to what her husband was hearing. The staffers who sometimes 
sat in on the briefings took no interest in the substance; their only interest 
was to ensure that the process did not take too much time. 


137 



During the last half of November 1980, the international situations 
that received the most prominent coverage in the press included the hos¬ 
tage crisis with Iran, the future of strategic arms talks with the Soviet 
Union, and domestic political developments in Israel and Poland—the lat¬ 
ter including the question of possible Soviet meddling or intervention. 
The same issues were treated at length in the PDB, and the President-elect 
was an avid reader on all subjects. He also read very carefully the back¬ 
ground pieces the briefers provided him. These supplementary papers, 
normally two pages long, were published on a regular basis to bring him 
up to date on trouble spots around the world. Within the first two weeks 
Reagan read backgrounders on the situations in Pakistan, Lebanon, Kam¬ 
puchea, Morocco, the Philippines, and Somalia. 

Taking into account the PDB, the accompanying oral briefings and 
the supplementary material, the intelligence Reagan received each day 
was significantly greater in volume and detail than that received by Carter 
during his transition four years earlier. At that time the practice had been 
simply to make the written PDB available for his perusal. 

From late November 1980 until early January 1981, Reagan read a 
number of current intelligence items relating to the hostage crisis in Iran. 
These pieces contained no sensitive US operational material. Rather, they 
kept the President-elect informed of the activities of various Iranian and 
third-country figures and provided such information as was available on 
the condition of the hostages and on developments in Iran. Reagan asked 
many questions about the hostage situation as well as about developments 
in the Soviet Union, Mexico, and Cuba—countries in which he clearly 
took a special interest. 

In the course of their daily meetings with the President-elect, Kerr 
and Davis provided considerable information about the US Intelligence 
Community and its collection programs. This practice, encouraged by 
Bush, was designed in part simply for the new president’s general back¬ 
ground knowledge but also to heighten his consciousness about what 
information should not be discussed publicly lest it jeopardize intelligence 
sources and methods. In these sessions there was no discussion whatever 
of CIA’s covert action programs. In contrast with the daily briefings pro¬ 
vided President-elect Clinton 12 years later, no support was provided 
directly to Reagan for use in telephone calls with foreign leaders, meet¬ 
ings with his own staff or visitors, or press conferences. 

Throughout the briefing process, Reagan displayed some of the 
understandable impatience that Agency briefers have seen with other 
presidents-elect over the years. He commented on a number of occasions, 
for example, on the awkwardness of reading the daily intelligence mate¬ 
rial, “even though I am not in a position to affect US policy.” He clearly 
was most interested in the items provided him on how foreign leaders and 
governments were reacting to his election, including their analyses and 


138 



speculation about policies he would follow. Reagan was entertained by 
accounts of foreign judgments on his probable behavior and worried by 
misrepresentations of his positions. 10 

There was another side to the President-elect that the Agency briefers 
found challenging and frustrating. According to Davis, “The problem with 
Ronald Reagan was that his ideas were all fixed. He knew what he 
thought about everything—he was an old dog.” 11 This was particularly 
apparent regarding issues involving the Palestinians. Reagan, by his own 
account, carried a decidedly pro-Israel attitude from his Hollywood asso¬ 
ciations over the years. 

In response to comments and questions from Reagan, Agency ana¬ 
lysts produced a three- or four-page memorandum on the subtleties of the 
Palestinian movement. The memorandum discussed the complex array of 
backgrounds, personalities, ideologies, tactics, and strategies that divided 
the Palestinian people and characterized the many groups inside and out¬ 
side the Palestine Liberation Organization. The President-elect read the 
memorandum “very slowly and thoughtfully—he must have taken 10 
minutes. At the end he said, ‘But they are all terrorists, aren’t they?’ My 
heart just sank.” 12 

During the 1980 transition, Bush and Allen, who was to become 
National Security Adviser, were also provided intelligence support on vir¬ 
tually a daily basis. In addition to playing an immensely important role in 
establishing the Agency’s relationship with Reagan, Bush was a key con¬ 
sumer in his own right. He read the current intelligence publications every 
day and requested a great deal of additional support for his meetings with 
foreign leaders. Reagan had delegated to him the task of meeting with or 
taking most calls from numerous heads of government and foreign ambas¬ 
sadors. In many cases the Agency’s supporting material was provided to 
Bush in person in Washington or in California. In other instances it was 
provided in Houston, particularly over the Christmas holiday. Bush’s sub¬ 
stantive interests paralleled Reagan’s, with the exception that the Vice 
President-elect had an even deeper interest in the details of any informa¬ 
tion relating to the hostages in Iran. His questions related primarily to 
information the Intelligence Community had on their health. 

Beginning on 18 November, Allen was briefed daily through the 
remainder of the transition. He initially attempted to interpose himself 
between the Agency briefers and the President-elect, on the first occasion 
insisting that he receive the PDB and take it to Reagan for his reading. 
Bush’s intervention with Reagan ensured that Agency briefers subse¬ 
quently saw him directly. Allen then received the PDB separately. He also 


10 Richard Kerr, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 9 March 1993. 

11 Dixon Davis, interview by the author in Washington, D.C„ 26 April 1993. 

12 Davis interview, 26 April 1993. 


139 



solicited significant additional support from the Agency for his own use 
and in support of Reagan. It was Allen, for example, who determined the 
subjects to be addressed in the first 10 “backgrounders” that were pro¬ 
vided to Reagan, and it was he who requested information from the 
Agency to prepare the President-elect for a meeting with Mexican Presi¬ 
dent Lopez-Portillo. 

The other two key players who were to be on the Reagan national 
security team, Secretary of State-designate Alexander Haig and Secretary 
of Defense-designate Caspar Weinberger, did not receive the PDB during 
the transition. Weinberger had requested PDB delivery as early as mid- 
December, but it was determined instead that he should receive the less 
sensitive National Intelligence Daily (NID) until he was sworn in. In fact, 
his first briefing with the PDB occurred within minutes of his swearing in 
as Secretary of Defense. Haig, too, began receiving PDB briefings on 
inauguration day. 


After the Inauguration 

The inauguration of Reagan marked a watershed in the CIA’s rela¬ 
tionship with him just as the inauguration of Carter had done four years 
before. In fact, it was even more decisive. During the transition, intelli¬ 
gence professionals had seen Reagan on a daily basis and had a relatively 
full discussion of international developments from which they could learn 
firsthand what his interests and needs were. Following the inauguration, 
with his staff trying to guard his time, this daily contact was cut off. Intel¬ 
ligence support was provided to the President only indirectly through the 
National Security Adviser, except in those cases where the CIA Director 
himself had occasion to meet with the President. 

In a meeting with Kerr on 2 January, shortly before inauguration, 
Allen had reviewed a variety of styles in which the PDB had been pub¬ 
lished over the years; he was not particularly taken with any of the previ¬ 
ous formats. Agency officers had learned by this time to expect such a 
reaction. With virtually every administration, if the format had not been 
designed specifically for that president, either the President or his 
National Security Adviser would ask that the publication be altered sub¬ 
stantially to make it their own. 

In this case, change was minimized because Kerr had discussed on 
several occasions during December and early January the format and 
composition of the PDB directly with Reagan. On each occasion, he had 
expressed his complete satisfaction with the length of the PDB, the format 
in which it was presented, and the level of generality of the pieces 
included. He claimed to want no changes at all. On 13 January it was 
agreed by all parties that the PDB would be provided daily to Allen, who 


140 



would forward it to the President. Additional copies were provided by 
individual CIA briefers to the Vice President, the National Security 
Adviser, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of State. 

Agency officers who provided daily intelligence support to the White 
House during the Reagan administration remember that his several 
national security advisers varied markedly in the time and attention they 
devoted to the PDB. In all cases, however, they received the Agency’s 
briefer every day, read the PDB, and ensured that it was forwarded to the 
President. Of the group, Adm. John Poindexter was perhaps the least 
interested in reading the intelligence product. 

Thinking back over the eight years of the two Reagan administra¬ 
tions, the Agency’s briefing officer remembered only one or two occasions 
when the National Security Adviser took him into the Oval Office to brief 
the President directly. Unlike Carter, Reagan almost never wrote com¬ 
ments or questions on the PDB. On a day-to-day basis, therefore, the 
Agency’s knowledge of the President’s intelligence needs was limited. 
Such knowledge came only indirectly when Reagan’s interests were 
passed on by the National Security Adviser or conveyed by the President 
directly to the CIA Director. 

Although distribution of the PDB theoretically was strictly con¬ 
trolled, as a practical matter the security of the document eroded during 
the Reagan years. At various points, several presidential advisers were 
receiving copies of the PDB. This situation unfortunately led the Agency 
to be circumspect in the items it included in the publication. This turn of 
events distressed Reagan’s second CIA Director, Judge William Webster, 
and Vice President Bush. Ultimately, the latter would be in a position to 
solve this problem and did. 

The fact that Reagan did not receive daily oral briefings from CIA 
officers did not mean that he did not receive intelligence information. 
Indeed, throughout the first few years of his administration, Reagan talked 
often with CIA Director Casey as well as with his other key national secu¬ 
rity aides. The President valued receiving information directly from indi¬ 
viduals he knew personally and with whom he was comfortable; he 
preferred informal sessions to the more formal NSC system, which was 
used only infrequently. 

This practice created concern among senior intelligence profession¬ 
als, who worried that the President was receiving, at best, information that 
was anecdotal and not necessarily as complete, relevant, or objective as it 
might have been. But it was a practice that clearly was in keeping with the 
President’s management style and personal preferences. In discussing the 
way he handled intelligence in 1993, Reagan summed up with the judg¬ 
ment that throughout his presidency, “I thought we received all the intelli¬ 
gence we needed to make decisions.” 


141 



Looking back on his presidency, Reagan acknowledged that he had 
been aware of the widely publicized strains between Secretary of State 
Shultz and Casey but claimed to have had no feeling that whatever ten¬ 
sions existed between the two men had affected the intelligence he 
received. He said he had not felt that the intelligence provided by the CIA 
was in any way politicized, volunteering that the Agency had given him 
the information he needed and did not tell him what to think. 

In discussing Reagan’s use of intelligence reporting, Bush noted that 
the President did indeed receive and read the key analytic pieces, espe¬ 
cially the PDB. In Bush’s judgment, Reagan was seeing information that 
was timely and relevant, but it had less impact because it was provided 
indirectly. Bush observed, “It was too bad that Ronald Reagan only read 
the intelligence at his leisure after he became President. The real benefit is 
having the briefer sit there with you.” 


The Transition to President Bush 13 

From the point of view of the US Intelligence Community, the transi¬ 
tion to the Bush presidency in 1988 was undoubtedly the easiest of the 
eight transitions in which the CIA had been involved. In only two previ¬ 
ous cases during the postwar period—Johnson in 1964 and Ford in 
1974—had an incumbent Vice President moved up to the presidency. 
Each of those accessions occurred amid unique and extraordinarily trying 
circumstances that made the intelligence transition difficult. The 1988 
turnover, by comparison, was the smoothest in postwar history. It also 
happened to bring into office the only US President to have served as CIA 
Director. 

CIA officers had been pleased when Vice President Bush, even 
before the Republican Convention in August 1988, reassured them that he 
wanted to continue receiving daily intelligence briefings throughout the 
campaign and after the election. Bush acknowledged that he would be 
forced to miss some of the daily briefings but asked that they be provided 
without fail when he was in Washington. An increased proportion of the 
meetings would have to be held at his residence rather than at his office, 
which Bush often bypassed as he traveled in and out of Washington dur¬ 
ing the campaign. 

13 In 1984, presidential candidate Walter Mondale did not receive briefings from the CIA. Nation¬ 
al Security Adviser Bud McFarlane provided him one overview of developments abroad in Min¬ 
neapolis during the summer, but Mondale did not seek follow-up sessions with the Agency. 
Remembering the events of a decade earlier during a discussion in Tokyo in April 1994, Ambas¬ 
sador Mondale joked that he might have come off better in campaign debates and sound bites had 
he had “more ammunition to work with.” He observed that he should have asked for a series of 
CIA briefings but laughingly conceded that he “never really thought (he) stood much of a chance 
against Reagan, which probably kept (him) from even thinking about preparing seriously for the 
presidency!” 


142 



The Vice President also made clear to Agency officers that, if he 
won, he planned to alter the arrangements then in place to provide intelli¬ 
gence support to Reagan. Bush stressed that he wanted to continue his 
daily sessions with CIA briefers not only during the transition period but 
also after his inauguration because he considered the personal dialogue 
was useful. The CIA briefer with whom Bush spoke recalled in 1994 that 
he had suggested that, after the inauguration, the DCI, as the President’s 
chief intelligence adviser, might wish to take over the daily briefings. 
Bush killed the idea on the spot; he “wanted working-level officers” to do 
the briefings. 14 

The Democratic candidate for president in 1988, Massachusetts Gov¬ 
ernor Michael Dukakis, was offered intelligence support and agreed to 
receive one briefing on worldwide developments at his home in 
Brookline, Massachusetts. The briefing was delivered on 22 August by 
CIA Director William Webster and his Deputy, Robert Gates, whose most 
vivid memory of the occasion involved the difficulty the two had in reach¬ 
ing the Dukakis home. Agency security officers were apparently unaware 
that the route from the hotel where the CIA officials were staying to the 
Dukakis residence passed through an area near Fenway Park that was 
completely congested with vehicles and pedestrians trying to force their 
way to a makeup baseball game. Gates later remembered with some 
amusement one moment during which the two were stranded in their car 
surrounded by the crowd. One irate woman peered into their automobile 
and, on seeing the distinguished Judge Webster, called out to her accom¬ 
panying friend, “It’s that damn Lloyd Bentsen.” 15 

Senator Bentsen was not in the car but, as Dukakis’s running mate, 
did attend the briefing. Dukakis had also invited Congressmen Louis 
Stokes and Lee Hamilton, successive chairmen of the House Intelligence 
Committee, and his adviser on security matters, Madeleine Albright. 
When the whole group assembled, there was a peculiar feeling; all of 
them save one knew each other well from their experience in working 
together on intelligence matters in the Congress or on the NSC Staff. 
Dukakis was the odd man out. 

The Governor was attentive as Webster and Gates talked, but he lis¬ 
tened with the detached air of someone who was doing it out of a sense of 
obligation rather than out of any real interest in the substance. After Web¬ 
ster finished an extended one-and-a-quarter-hour presentation on world¬ 
wide developments and Gates followed with a 15-minute review of 
developments in the Soviet Union, Dukakis thanked them but raised no 
questions. Hamilton and Bentsen posed a few questions that were 
designed to illuminate matters for the Governor but failed to spark his 

14 Charles Peters, telephone interview by the author, McLean, Virginia, 31 January 1994. 

15 Robert Gates, interview by the author in McLean, Virginia, 12 April 1993. 


143 



interest. Like the briefings given other presidential candidates in preelec¬ 
tion periods, the one for Dukakis was devoted entirely to developments 
abroad. It did not include a discussion of CIA covert action or sensitive 
collection programs. 

In the presidential debates of 1988, CIA officials were expecting the 
worst from the time the first question was answered. That question, raised 
during the debate in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, on 25 September, 
related to narcotics use in the United States. In his answer, Dukakis 
charged that the administration of Reagan and Bush had been “dealing 
with a drug-running Panamanian dictator,” Manuel Noriega. The Gover¬ 
nor did not specifically mention CIA, one of several US Government 
agencies that had dealt with Noriega, but Bush did. 

The Vice President replied to Dukakis’s charges by saying, “The 
other day my opponent was given a briefing by the CIA. I asked for and 
received the same briefing. I am very careful in public life about dealing 
with classified information, and what I’m about to say is unclassified.” 
Bush then went on to explain that seven administrations had dealt with 
Noriega and it was the Reagan-Bush administration that had “brought this 
man to justice.” CIA officers worried not about the facts of their activities 
in Panama, which they believed perfectly defensible, but were concerned 
that the Agency’s briefings and programs were about to become a political 
football once again. 16 

The Agency was still the focus of much media attention generated by 
the activist policies of its late Director, William Casey. Moreover, in the 
course of the first debate, the candidates addressed such politically 
charged issues as arms sales to Iran, policy toward Central America, US- 
Soviet arms control negotiations, and the future of the Strategic Defense 
Initiative, “Star Wars.” Bush attacked Dukakis for his alleged failure to 
support the US military strike on Libya in 1986; Dukakis, in turn, criti¬ 
cized Bush for US policies on Angola. Yet, despite these heated and 
potentially explosive exchanges, CIA did not become a political issue in 
that debate or later in the campaign. The second and only other debate 
between the presidential candidates was held on 13 October in Los Ange¬ 
les. On that occasion little attention was paid to foreign policy issues, and 
there was no mention whatever of the Central Intelligence Agency. 

In the postelection period, Bush quickly directed the Agency to pro¬ 
vide daily briefings to those who would make up his key national security 
team: Vice President Dan Quayle, Chief of Staff John Sununu, and 
National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft. The President-elect also 
checked to make sure that the Agency was making the PDB available to 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. William Crowe. Bush 


16 “Bush and Dukakis, Face to Face on Key Issues,” Congressional Quarterly, l October 1988, 
p. 2743. 


144 




President George Bush meets with CIA briefer Charles Peters, DCI William Webster, 
Chief of Staff John Sununu, Assistant to the President Robert Gates, and National 
Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft. Peters had headed the PDB staff during Bush’s 
Vice Presidency and remained his principal briefer. 


wanted all these recipients to be reminded of what information came from 
sensitive sources and methods so that they would not inadvertently dis¬ 
close what was classified. He further directed that he did not want the 
PDB “floating around”; CIA was to show the PDB to authorized recipi¬ 
ents and then take it back—it was to be left with no one. His intent was to 
tighten control of the document “to ensure that the Agency felt free to 
include more sensitive material.” Speaking for himself. Bush underscored 
that he did not want to “get lazy.” The Agency briefer was to appear at 
8:15 on his first day in office. 17 

During his four years in office, Bush routinely received the Agency 
briefer every working day, almost always as the first item of business in 
the morning. Webster attended these sessions regularly while he was DCI; 
Gates did so less frequently. The President read the PDB carefully and 
quite often examined some of the raw intelligence reports that elaborated 
on an article he found interesting in the PDB. Occasionally there would be 
an extended exchange between the President and the Agency’s briefer; 
more often, the President or the National Security Adviser would pose a 
few specific questions. The briefer would answer these on the spot or take 
them back to the Agency to prepare a more satisfactory oral or written 
answer the following morning. 


17 Peters interview, 31 January 1994. 


145 




















This system provided the President direct and timely intelligence 
support and the CIA intimate knowledge of his interests and needs. The 
fact that the briefings were held in the early morning was especially help¬ 
ful because that was when he was most likely to be making and receiving 
telephone calls to heads of state in Europe. Agency briefers were immedi¬ 
ately at hand to respond to any information needed to deal with these 
calls. Bush was much quicker in his daily routine to use the telephone 
than his predecessors, not only to contact foreign leaders but also to con¬ 
tact the CIA Director for an update on the latest developments. 

In discussing the system of daily briefings, Bush observed after his 
retirement in 1993 that “The real payoff is having the Agency briefer there 
to follow up. But having too many people around creates a problem—I 
held it to the National Security Adviser and sometimes the Chief of Staff. 
If the group grows, pretty soon word gets out that ‘He’s considering 
bombing Bosnia’ or whatever.” 

Thinking back on the transition from his eight years as Vice Presi¬ 
dent to the four years as President, Bush volunteered that there had been 
no real changes in his intelligence requirements after he moved up to be 
chief executive. “The big difference is that you have to make the deci¬ 
sions—that makes you read a lot more carefully.” 

On becoming President, Bush had sought no significant alterations in 
the format or composition of the PDB. He had become comfortable with it 
over the previous eight years. Looking retrospectively, he judged that the 
mix of items addressed had been well suited to his needs. He attributed 
that suitability to the presence of the briefer while he read the material, 
making the Agency aware that he needed more or less on a given subject. 
Bush was sensitive to the fact that his National Security Adviser and 
Chief of Staff would occasionally discuss with senior Agency officers the 
purported need to include more items on a specific subject in the PDB. 
Referring to the efforts of his aides to determine what was provided in the 
PDB, Bush offered the decisive judgment that “I felt well supported on 
the full range of issues. Don’t let anybody else tell you what the President 
wants or needs in the PDB—ask him.” 

CIA’s relationship with Bush was undoubtedly the most productive it 
had enjoyed with any of the nine presidents it served since the Agency’s 
founding in 1947. Alone among postwar Presidents, he had served as CIA 
Director. Also uniquely, he succeeded to the presidency by election after 
receiving full intelligence support as Vice President. These circumstances 
were obviously not of the CIA’s making and may never be repeated, but 
they made the Agency’s job immeasurably easier at the time. 

The good relationship was also a result of Bush’s deep personal 
interest in developments abroad and his experience as a diplomat repre¬ 
senting the United States in Beijing and at the United Nations. More than 
any other President, he was an experienced consumer of national-level 


146 



intelligence. Also of critical importance was the fact that he had a highly 
capable and experienced National Security Adviser in Brent Scowcroft, 
who was determined to see that he received good intelligence support. 

Bush was candid in telling CIA officers when he thought their analy¬ 
sis might be flawed and equally quick to commend them when they were 
helpful or identified an approaching key development before he did. There 
were many such developments because his presidency witnessed the most 
far-reaching international changes of the postwar period: the collapse of 
European Communism, the reunification of Germany, the disintegration 
of the USSR and the rollback of Russian imperialism, and the full-scale 
involvement of the United States in a ground war in the Middle East. On 
these, and on the lesser issues of Tiananmen Square, Haiti, Bosnia, or 
Somalia, President Bush was uniquely and extraordinarily well informed. 


147 




Chapter 7 


Concluding Observations 


Through nine transitions since 1952, the CIA has provided intelli¬ 
gence support to presidents-elect. This support, endorsed by each of the 
sitting presidents, has been designed primarily to acquaint the incoming 
president with developments abroad that will require his decisions and 
actions as president. A second goal has been to establish a solid working 
relationship with each new president and his advisers so the Agency could 
serve him well, once in office. 

The CIA has been generally, but not uniformly, successful in accom¬ 
plishing these goals. Overall, it has proved easier to help the new presi¬ 
dent become well informed than to establish an enduring relationship. 
Both aims have been met better in recent transitions than during some of 
the earlier ones. At the time they took office, the first five postwar presi¬ 
dents differed markedly from the second group of five. In general, the lat¬ 
ter had a greater and more up-to-date familiarity with intelligence 
information. Two of the earlier group, Eisenhower and Nixon, were expe¬ 
rienced and expert in foreign affairs, but their knowledge of intelligence 
programs was dated and incomplete. 

The background and attitudes that the president-elect brings with him 
obviously are powerful variables in determining the extent to which the 
CIA effort will succeed. Ironically, prior familiarity with the Intelligence 
Community and experience with foreign developments—or lack 
thereof—do not by themselves predict much of anything. Presidents Clin¬ 
ton and Reagan, for example, were by any objective measure the least 
experienced in foreign affairs at the time of their election, yet by inaugu¬ 
ration day each had absorbed an immense amount of information. Once in 
office, their dramatically different operating styles dictated the nature of 
their equally different relationships with the CIA. 

At the other extreme. Presidents Bush and Eisenhower provide the 
clearest cases of individuals who had had long experience with foreign 
affairs before their election. Here too, however, their management styles, 


149 



personal interests, and backgrounds determined their different relation¬ 
ships with CIA after inauguration—informal and close in one case, formal 
and aloof in the other. The Agency had provided good substantive support 
to each during the transition. 

In the three cases where the CIA’s relationship with the White House 
was to prove the least satisfactory—or the most volatile, a different but 
equally challenging matter—the president either brought a grudge with 
him or quickly became disillusioned with the Agency. President Nixon 
felt the CIA had cost him the 1960 election; President Kennedy was 
immediately undercut and disillusioned by the CIA-run Bay of Pigs mis¬ 
adventure; and President Johnson was alienated by CIA’s negative assess¬ 
ments on Vietnam. In each of these cases the relationship was not helped 
by the fact that the Agency had not succeeded in providing good intelli¬ 
gence support to, and establishing ties with, any of the three before their 
inauguration. 

The obvious but sometimes elusive key for the CIA, and particularly 
its director, is to grasp each new president’s needs and operating style and 
accommodate them during the transition and beyond. Individual proclivi¬ 
ties aside, however, some generalizations can be offered about how CIA 
can best approach its unique mission of providing substantive support dur¬ 
ing presidential transitions. Most of the evidence suggests that the Agency 
has learned from its past experiences and built on them. 


Patterns of Support 

In looking at the intelligence support provided the first five presi¬ 
dents before their inauguration, it is necessary to set aside President Tru¬ 
man, who came to office before the creation of the CIA, and Johnson, 
whose elevation to the presidency came suddenly amid extraordinary cir¬ 
cumstances that one hopes will never be repeated. Concerning the other 
three, it is notable that each of them—Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Nixon— 
received intelligence briefings both in the preelection period and during 
the postelection transition. Kennedy and Nixon received few briefings; 
Eisenhower was given somewhat more, including several presented by the 
DCI. However, not one of the first group of five read the Agency’s daily 
publications or met with a CIA officer for daily updates during the transi¬ 
tion. Only Kennedy received a briefing on covert activities and sensitive 
collection programs before being sworn in. 

During the first 25 years of its existence, CIA enjoyed no significant 
success in its efforts to establish a more productive and supportive rela¬ 
tionship with each President. The reverse was true: these relationships 
went downhill after Truman. He had received intelligence information at 
the weekly meetings of the National Security Council, read the Agency’s 


150 



daily and weekly intelligence publications, and received in-depth weekly 
briefings from the DCL His successor, Eisenhower, was perhaps the best 
at using the NSC as a vehicle for receiving intelligence, but he did not 
read the publications regularly and did not routinely see the DCI for sepa¬ 
rate intelligence briefings. Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon also received 
intelligence information at NSC meetings, although they relied less on the 
formal NSC system. Once in office, these three presidents did read a daily 
intelligence publication, which took a different form for each. However, 
none of the first five presidents read it with the assistance of an Agency 
briefer, as has been the custom in more recent years. 

No DCI during the Agency's early decades was able to replicate on a 
continuing basis the relationship that Bedell Smith had established with 
Truman. During the early Johnson years, John McCone attempted to 
restart regular briefings of the President, but the President became impa¬ 
tient and ended them before long. The third DCI to serve under Johnson, 
Richard Helms, saw that an alternative approach was needed and man¬ 
aged to establish an excellent relationship with the President by providing 
him intelligence at the famous Tuesday luncheons and via short, highly 
pertinent papers. But even Helms could not sustain his access or influence 
with Nixon. During Nixon’s years in office, the relationship between the 
President and the CIA reached the lowest point in the Agency’s history. 

The five presidents who came into office since the mid-seventies 
received from the CIA significantly more up-to-date information regard¬ 
ing developments abroad and on the activities of the US Intelligence 
Community than their predecessors did prior to taking office. Like their 
predecessors, they all received briefings from the DCI or other senior CIA 
officials. Unlike their predecessors, however, they read the Presidents 
Daily Brief ( PDB) throughout the transition. With some variations in how 
it was done, each of them met daily with an officer of CIA who provided 
oral briefings to supplement the PDB. Four of this group—Ford, Carter, 
Reagan, and Bush—were given in-depth descriptions of CIA covert 
action and sensitive collection programs. Clinton did not receive such a 
briefing. Outgoing DCI Robert Gates decided to use his one briefing 
opportunity with Clinton to concentrate on substantive issues and to leave 
discussion of sensitive activities to the post-inauguration period. 

Once in office, all five of the recent presidents received intelligence 
at meetings of the NSC and all read the PDB regularly. Distinguishing 
them from their predecessors, however, was the fact that all of the recent 
presidents, except Reagan, reviewed the PDB with a briefer in attendance. 
During the presidencies of Gerald Ford and George Bush, and sporadi¬ 
cally with Bill Clinton, a CIA officer (sometimes the DCI himself) would 
be present for these morning sessions. During Jimmy Carter’s presidency 
and for a portion of Ford’s term, there were no daily CIA briefings; 
instead, the National Security Adviser was with the President while he 


151 



read the PDB and other intelligence information. During Carter’s term, 
the DCI played a lesser role during daily briefings but had a more formal 
and satisfactory system of weekly, in-depth discussions on subjects of 
expressed interest to the President. 

The single, most critical test of whether CIA is properly supporting 
the US policymaking process is the effectiveness of the intelligence sup¬ 
port provided to the President. Overall, the level of that support deterio¬ 
rated somewhat during the CIA’s first 25 years, but it improved and 
strengthened during the period from the early seventies to the early nine¬ 
ties. To a substantial extent, this strengthening resulted from the leader¬ 
ship of one man, George Bush. Bush ensured that full intelligence support 
was given to Presidents Ford, Carter, and Reagan, and his own presidency 
was a high point in terms of the CIA’s relationship with the White House. 
President Clinton and his national security team received extensive intelli¬ 
gence support during the transition, and in office this support continued at 
a historically high level. 


What the Presidents Recommend 

Interviews with four former Presidents eliciting their opinions on 
why the system of intelligence support worked better during some transi¬ 
tions and administrations than others unearthed one immediate, common, 
and obvious reaction: each President is different. Ford, in particular, 
stressed that point, asserting that “the backgrounds and circumstances of 
the various presidents are so different that there can be no one formula for 
future support. Eisenhower or Ford or even Kennedy were so much more 
familiar with intelligence than a Clinton or a Reagan.” Ford went on to 
underscore that “the Intelligence Community has to be prepared to be 
flexible to accommodate the different experiences.” 1 

Carter had some of the most concrete advice on how the CIA ought 
to go about establishing its relationship with each president-elect. As a 
start, he urged the Agency to “give a new president-elect a paper on what 
previous presidents had done regarding intelligence support. Let the next 
incumbent decide—show them the gamut of material.” 2 

In discussing how presidents and times change, Carter noted that, if 
he were in the White House in the nineties, he would welcome computer¬ 
ized intelligence support in the Oval Office. Pleased to hear that the 
Agency had been experimenting for some time with a system for making 
real-time intelligence available via a computer terminal on the desk of 


1 Gerald Ford, interview by the author in BeaverCreek, Colorado, 8 September 1993. Subsequent 
observations by Ford also come from this interview. 

2 Jimmy Carter, interview by the author in Atlanta, Georgia, 23 June 1993. Subsequent observa¬ 
tions by Carter also come from this interview. 


152 



senior consumers. Carter volunteered, “If I was in the White House now I 
would welcome it. I feel comfortable with computers and would use it, 
not as a substitute for the other support, the PDB and the briefings, but in 
addition to it.” He explained that when a question arose about develop¬ 
ments in a particular country he would “like to have access to something 
where I could punch in a request for the latest information.” 

CIA’s experience indicates that a critically important variable in 
establishing a successful relationship is the approach taken by the DCI. 
Comments of the Presidents who were interviewed reinforced that impres¬ 
sion. During every transition, the CIA’s Director has been involved per¬ 
sonally in providing at least one, and in some cases many, briefings. In 
those cases where the relationship was established most effectively, the 
common factor was that the DCI succeeded in bringing the institution into 
the process so that CIA officers could assist him and carry the process for¬ 
ward after his role diminished or was discontinued. In one form or 
another, this has been accomplished with each of the presidents elected in 
the last 20 years. 

When the institutional link between the Agency and the President 
was not properly established, it was usually because the DCI attempted to 
handle the relationship singlehandedly. Two cases show that this can hap¬ 
pen in quite different ways. DCI Allen Dulles, for example, chose to sup¬ 
port the incoming Kennedy administration almost entirely on his own, 
giving three briefings to Kennedy and involving only one other Agency 
person. Those briefings reportedly did not impress Kennedy, and the rela¬ 
tionship between the two men, complicated immensely by the Bay of Pigs 
fiasco, unraveled within months. 

In the case of Nixon, Helms was involved in one briefing immedi¬ 
ately after Nixon’s selection and in a later perfunctory discussion at the 
White House. Unfortunately, the handoff of responsibility from the DCI to 
the CIA career officers positioned in New York to provide support did not 
succeed in its fundamental purpose. Nixon was never seen personally, and 
he read very little Agency material. Given his deep suspicions of the CIA 
and Henry Kissinger’s determination to monopolize all contact with the 
new president, it is doubtful that the relationship could have been handled 
any better. The Agency’s inability to establish a satisfactory relationship 
at the outset continued throughout the Nixon presidency—arguably, to the 
detriment of both the President and the Agency. 

While vigorous and effective action by the DCI clearly is a determin¬ 
ing factor in establishing the Agency’s institutional relationship with a 
new president, it does not follow that such involvement solidifies the posi¬ 
tion of the DCI himself with the new president or administration. The 
directors who were the most involved in transition support activities 
included Smith with Eisenhower, Dulles with Kennedy, Bush with Carter, 
and Turner with Reagan. Sadly, each was disappointed with the role he 
was given, or not given, by the incoming president. 


153 



No CIA director retained from one administration to the next is des¬ 
tined to succeed. All in this category were dismissed or felt obliged to 
resign. Dulles was very successful serving under Eisenhower but lasted 
only a few months with Kennedy. McCone served successfully under 
Kennedy but quickly wore out his welcome with Johnson. Helms was 
among the Agency’s most successful directors during the Johnson years 
but was later dismissed by Nixon. Colby served in particularly difficult 
circumstances under Nixon, only to be dismissed later by Ford. 

The most recent case in which a director was held over, that of Will¬ 
iam Webster, illustrates a larger point as well. He was appointed by 
Reagan and served successfully in a rather formal relationship with him. 
Webster had a fairly extended period in the Bush administration as well, 
faring better than any predecessor who had been extended from one 
administration to the next. On the other hand, he never established with 
Bush and his key White House aides the close relationship that his succes¬ 
sor, Robert Gates, enjoyed as a result of his prior service as Deputy Assis¬ 
tant to the President for National Security Affairs. 

It is often suggested that for each of the DCIs who was asked to 
resign there was a single explanatory cause. For Dulles, the argument goes, 
it was the Bay of Pigs; for McCone, the Agency’s independent analysis of 
the war in Vietnam; for Helms, the failure to cooperate on the Watergate 
coverup; for Colby, his failure to alert the White House in advance of the 
public exposures of the Agency’s misdeeds. A more careful analysis, how¬ 
ever, indicates that every DCI encountered serious difficulties of one kind 
or another, including some that were an embarrassment to the White 
House. Most of these problems, however, did not lead to the DCI’s dis¬ 
missal. The common link among Directors who were dismissed was that 
none was appointed by the President whose confidence he later lost. 

Looking at the matter from a different perspective, in almost all cases 
the president has protected directors of the CIA whom he has appointed. 
Since the Agency was founded in 1947, a president has selected and 
appointed a DCI in 14 cases, and in five the President has retained a direc¬ 
tor appointed by his predecessor. In none of the 14 cases did the President 
ask for the resignation of the CIA director he appointed. 3 The psychologi¬ 
cal and political commitment a president makes to a director he has 
appointed is obviously critical to sustaining their relationship. 


3 It could be argued that the cases of Adm. William F. Rabom, Jr. and James Woolsey were ex¬ 
ceptions. According to former DCI Richard Helms, Rabom had been appointed by President 
Johnson primarily because of his high standing on Capitol Hill. Rabom resigned after only 
14 months, in large part because he and the President had become aware that key Senators were 
critical of his obvious failure to have mastered the substantive issues on which he testified. In the 
more recent case, James Woolsey served two years, but, like Rabom, resigned when he ran afoul 
of the Congress and received only limited White House backing. 


154 



Each of the former presidents interviewed underscored that it is of 
the highest importance for a president to have a CIA director in whom he 
has confidence and with whom he feels comfortable. Opinions were 
mixed regarding the best background or qualifications of a DCI, whether a 
nominee should be an intelligence professional or an outsider, and con¬ 
cerning the importance of the candidate’s political background. Recalling 
his nomination of Gates, Bush explained, “It helped that Gates had been a 
professional, but I picked him because he did such a good job sitting right 
here [on the deck of the Bush home at Kennebunkport, while serving as 
Deputy National Security Adviser]. Actually, I had known Bill Webster 
better over the years socially, from tennis and so on, than I had Bob 
Gates.” 4 With the unique perspective that came from having been CIA 
Director as well as President, Bush refused to be pinned down on the 
issues of whether a CIA professional should hold the director’s job and 
whether there should be a turnover of directors at the end of each adminis¬ 
tration. Rather, he suggested, “There should be no set rule. It would be 
good for the Agency to know that one of their own could be DCI. We 
should never feel like the torch has to pass (at the end of an administra¬ 
tion).” 

Like Bush, Ford had no strong feelings on the question of whether a 
DCI should continue in office from one administration to the next. He 
pointed out that he “had inherited one and appointed one. You need the 
right person that you are comfortable with. I worked well with both Colby 
and Bush.” Ford underscored repeatedly that he had the highest confi¬ 
dence in Colby’s handling of the Agency’s intelligence collection and ana¬ 
lytic activities, but he concluded midway through his term that he simply 
had to appoint a different director to defuse tensions with the Congress 
over the CIA’s past activities. Ford was most charitable in his character¬ 
izations of Colby, euphemistically referring to his “resignation” and not¬ 
ing that “I offered him the job of Ambassador to Norway, but he 
declined.” 

All of the former presidents interviewed, with the exception of 
Reagan, expressed the feeling that the individual selected to run the CIA 
should be apolitical. Carter, for example, volunteered that, although Bush 
had proved to be a very capable director of the Agency, his selection had 
been ill advised because of Bush’s role as Chairman of the Republican 
Party—“he was too political.” Without, ironically, discussing his own ini¬ 
tial choice of Kennedy political adviser Theodore Sorensen to serve as 


4 George Bush, interview by the author in Kennebunkport, Maine, 6 May 1993. Subsequent 
observations by Bush also come from this interview. 


155 



DCI, Carter stressed that the man who did serve as CIA Director in his 
administration, Adm. Stansfield Turner, had been a career military officer 
without any political ties who was also experienced in using intelligence. 

More than one of those interviewed was critical of, and used as an 
example, the selection of William Casey as CIA Director Bush, who like 
Helms has been a forceful advocate of the need to keep intelligence and 
policy separate, volunteered, “Casey was an inappropriate choice. We 
would be having a Cabinet discussion of agriculture and there would be 
Casey. That shouldn’t be—the DCI should not enter into policy discus¬ 
sions.” 

Kissinger has written that Nixon also believed that the job of CIA 
Director should not be a political plum and that this conviction led Nixon 
to retain Helms rather than appoint a new director. Nixon’s decision was 
made against a backdrop in which his two predecessors, Johnson and 
Kennedy, had retained a CIA Director from the previous administration. 
Kissinger records that it was his discussion of these considerations with 
Nixon that led the latter to retain Helms despite Nixon’s reservations 
about CIA as an institution and his lack of comfort with Helms personally. 
Nixon’s discomfort allegedly derived in part from the fact that Helms 
moved in Ivy League and Georgetown social circles. 5 

Kissinger’s recollections of Nixon’s decisionmaking during the tran¬ 
sition are fascinating, but mistaken regarding the sequence of events sur¬ 
rounding the reappointment of Helms. According to his own account, 
Kissinger’s first meeting with Nixon during the transition period was on 
Monday, 25 November, in Nixon’s suite at the Pierre Hotel in New York 
City. Kissinger apparently was unaware at that time, and perhaps was 
always unaware, that Nixon had summoned Helms to that same suite 10 
days earlier, on Friday, 15 November. At that meeting, Nixon, accompa¬ 
nied only by John Mitchell, formally offered Helms the job of CIA Direc¬ 
tor in the Nixon administration. Nixon’s action apparently was taken 
because outgoing President Johnson had twice recommended Helms to 
Nixon. The most recent occasion on which Johnson had commended 
Helms had been four days earlier, on 11 November, when Johnson, Nixon, 
Helms, and others had met in Washington at the White House. 

The inescapable lesson from CIA history—albeit a lesson that nei¬ 
ther Presidents nor DCIs are eager to draw explicitly—is that it works bet¬ 
ter when a new president appoints his own CIA director. In the 
intelligence business innumerable delicate actions are undertaken that 
have the potential to embarrass the US Government and the President per¬ 
sonally if they are mishandled or if misfortune strikes. In these circum¬ 
stances it is not only a matter of the President being comfortable with his 
DCI, but also he must trust him implicitly, be associated with him politi¬ 
cally, and, above all, give him routine access. 


5 Henry Kissinger, White House Years (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1979), pp. 11, 36. 


156 



The alternative thesis argues that some things are more important 
than a close relationship with the President. According to this view, 
appointing a CIA career officer as director and routinely carrying over a 
DCI from one administration to the next is the best way to protect the 
Agency’s nonpolitical status and its operational and analytical integrity. 
Appealing as this notion is to Agency professionals, history does not treat 
it kindly. The incidence of occasions in which the CIA has become 
embroiled in politically stupid or even illegal actions does not correlate 
with whether the DCI was a political appointee or an intelligence profes¬ 
sional. 

The relationship of trust between President and DCI occasionally 
derives from close personal or professional associations in the past, wit¬ 
ness the cases of Ford and Bush, Reagan and Casey, and Bush and Gates. 
Alternatively, there have been several cases where the President did not 
personally know well the individual he appointed as DCI, but was willing 
to accept the assurances of others that the nominee would serve with dis¬ 
tinction. Such cases included Kennedy and McCone, Johnson and Helms, 
Carter and Turner, and Clinton and Woolsey. 


Keeping Out of Politics 

Perhaps the most challenging of the political issues with which the 
Agency must grapple in establishing and sustaining its relationship with a 
new administration is how to support the President without being drawn 
into policymaking. It frequently takes some time for a new administration, 
and even for a new CIA director, to understand that the Agency’s proper, 
limited role is to provide policymakers relevant and timely raw intelli¬ 
gence and considered, objective analyses, including analyses of the proba¬ 
ble ramifications of different US courses of action. Experience has shown 
that the Agency should not go the additional step and become involved in 
recommending policy. 

Not infrequently, CIA directors during transition periods have been 
offered tempting opportunities to go beyond the bounds of proper intelli¬ 
gence support into policy deliberations. DCI Smith reportedly was highly 
alert to these potential pitfalls and held to a “strict constructionist” view of 
his responsibilities. When Eisenhower, not wanting to rely solely on the 
US Army’s analysis of how the war in Korea was going, called for a CIA 
briefing that virtually invited a different interpretation and policy involve¬ 
ment, Smith—an experienced general officer and once Eisenhower’s 
Chief of Staff—was very careful to stick to the facts and make no recom¬ 
mendations. 


157 



The line between intelligence and policy was not respected so care¬ 
fully by those providing support to the two following Presidents. The 
written record leaves little doubt that Agency analysts’ independent 
assessment of developments in Castro’s Cuba was not solicited by or 
offered to Kennedy when he began his deliberations leading up to the Bay 
of Pigs operation. Not even the informal assessments of the working-level 
operations officers were included in the presentations given the new presi¬ 
dent and his team. CIA’s senior managers, including Allen Dulles and 
Deputy Director for Plans (Operations) Richard Bissell, perceived an obli¬ 
gation to devise and execute a program that would “do something” about 
Castro. Some consciously proceeded against their better judgment of the 
probable outcome but, ironically, did not want to let down either Eisen¬ 
hower, who was pressing for action, or Kennedy, who had committed 
himself to their program. 

Johnson presented a temptation of a different sort to the DCI he 
retained from the Kennedy period. The President found that John McCone 
would give him independent assessments of the course of the war in Viet¬ 
nam. McCone’s candor and outspokenness led Johnson to solicit from him 
advice on what should be done regarding the conflict and concerning the 
assignments of diplomatic personnel—matters that were not properly part 
of McCone’s responsibilities. Flattered by the new President, McCone 
offered advice going beyond his brief in a manner that soon put him at 
odds with his counterparts in other government departments and, before 
many months had passed, with the President himself. 

The lesson that Dulles and McCone had been burned by their 
involvement in policymaking was not lost on Helms, who served as DCI 
for the bulk of the Johnson and Nixon presidencies. More than any previ¬ 
ous Director, Helms was careful to limit his role to providing intelligence 
while staying out of policy discussions. He also recognized and stressed 
the need to get intelligence facts and analysis to the President at a length 
and in a form that was digestible. 

Kissinger has written perceptively of the challenge a DCI faces in 
walking the fine line between offering intelligence support and making 
policy recommendations. Probably more than any other National Security 
Adviser, he was sensitive to the reality that an assessment of the probable 
implications of any US action can come across implicitly or explicitly, 
intended or not, as a policy recommendation. He wrote in White House 
Years , “It is to the Director that the assistant first turns to learn the facts in 
a crisis and for analysis of events, and since decisions turn on the percep¬ 
tion of the consequences of actions the CIA assessment can almost 
amount to a policy recommendation.” Of Helms, he said, “Disciplined, 
meticulously fair and discreet, Helms performed his duties with a total 
objectivity essential to an effective intelligence service. I never knew him 
to misuse his intelligence or his power. He never forgot that his integrity 


158 



guaranteed his effectiveness, that his best weapon with presidents was a 
reputation for reliability.... The CIA input was an important element of 
every policy deliberation....” 6 

In discussing how to ensure that the information provided the presi¬ 
dent-elect regarding developments abroad is politically neutral, Bush 
observed that the key factor is the people selected to provide the informa¬ 
tion. He volunteered that the CIA is probably better positioned than other 
intelligence agencies to ensure a neutral presentation: “It is much better to 
leave the briefings to CIA than to get other outfits involved. The others are 
all involved in policy. If you include the military intelligence people and 
DIA, the president-elect would think you were trying to sell him some¬ 
thing.” Bush added that he had complete confidence in CIA to represent 
all sides on controversial issues and to avoid getting into politics. 


The Arrangements Make a Difference 

Improvements can and, in this author's view, should be made to 
strengthen the support the Intelligence Community provides to new presi¬ 
dents. Despite Bush’s confidence in letting the CIA represent the other 
agencies in its daily briefings of the president-elect, the Agency’s past per¬ 
formance of that responsibility has been decidedly uneven. The success of 
the process cannot be left to the initiative of the individual charged with 
supporting the President; better institutional arrangements are necessary 
to ensure that relevant material from the other agencies also reaches the 
president-elect. 

From the earliest years, comments by the presidents-elect or their 
senior staffs have revealed that they were aware of this problem. Eisen¬ 
hower, for example, lamented that he was not receiving regularly both 
Army operational assessments and CIA information on the situation in 
Korea. Kissinger, speaking for Nixon, at one point insisted—without 
result—that information and/or personnel from the State Department 
accompany the Agency’s daily support. In 1992 one of the first questions 
raised by Clinton’s staff with the Agency’s representative in Little Rock 
related to how the various agencies of the Intelligence Community 
worked together and whether the CIA officer would be including their 
information in his briefings. 

Expanding the size of the team that provides daily intelligence to the 
president-elect would be unwieldy and duplicative. One suggested solu¬ 
tion would be to designate an officer in each of the other agencies—such 
as the Department of State, National Security Agency, Defense Intelli¬ 
gence Agency, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff—to support the operation 


6 Henry Kissinger, White House Years , pp. 37, 487. 


159 



remotely. Each day these officers could forward to the CIA officer on site 
a brief paper with points they would like to bring to the President’s atten¬ 
tion. The President-elect would be likely to concentrate on the PDB, but 
on a case-by-case basis he could read important stand-alone papers from 
the other agencies, and the material would be a useful supplement ensur¬ 
ing an informed discussion. More important, perhaps, such a procedure 
would ensure that the full range of the Intelligence Community’s input 
was available for review by his staff. 

During the Clinton transition, the State Department’s Bureau of 
Intelligence and Research routinely sent its daily Intelligence Summary to 
the support team in Little Rock. About once a week, information tailored 
for the President-elect was provided by the National Security Agency, 
and, on occasion, other agencies. Better management of this hit-and-miss 
approach would support the President-elect with more timely intelligence 
and provide other agencies valuable opportunities to show what they can 
do and to establish themselves with the President-elect. 

The chief impediment to establishing the proper links in the past has 
been the fact that at the highest levels of the policy agencies, especially 
State and Defense, virtually everyone empowered to put these support 
arrangements in place has been a political appointee whose loyalties are to 
the outgoing administration. Hence, they typically have little stake in sup¬ 
porting the incoming administration. Historically, outgoing presidents 
have risen above this parochialism much better than their own staffs or 
their political appointees in the various departments. Advance prepara¬ 
tions initiated by the CIA could deal with this problem. 

Experience has indicated that the system works best if the Agency’s 
support team is in place in the city where the President-elect has set up his 
offices. The CIA has attempted to do this from the outset but has had 
mixed results. During the Eisenhower transition, for example, the support 
operation established in New York City was never utilized by Eisenhower 
himself and provided relatively minimal support to his senior assistants, 
notably Sherman Adams. Because Kennedy spent much of the transition 
period in Washington, albeit with extended stays at Hyannisport and Palm 
Beach, there was no separate team set up specifically to support him. Pro¬ 
vision of daily intelligence had been approved by outgoing President 
Eisenhower, but a satisfactory system to provide continuous support was 
never established with the incoming Democratic president. This clearly 
was a missed opportunity to establish a good relationship with Kennedy 
and his senior assistants, many of whom were unfamiliar with and suspi¬ 
cious of the Agency. 

In the cases of Nixon and Carter, support operations were established 
that succeeded in making intelligence available on a daily basis. Retro¬ 
spectively, however, it may be that the officers who supported the Nixon 
transition in New York were too junior to gain the necessary entree. Nixon 


160 



never received the Agency’s representatives, although Kissinger did so 
frequently. Carter personally received an Agency officer each day, but he 
was more a courier than a substantive expert. 

The system has worked best when the CIA has made available to the 
incoming president—on a continuous basis and on the scene—an experi¬ 
enced senior officer who can engage in some substantive give and take on 
the spot. The two contrasting cases where a Vice President moved up to 
the presidency in midterm provide an instructive example of,the benefits 
of having established a familiar relationship for the discussion of substan¬ 
tive issues one-on-one. Ford had been receiving daily briefings from a 
senior member of the PDB staff for many months before his accession to 
the presidency. This compared favorably to the difficult situation where 
Johnson, as Vice President, had been specifically denied the President’s 
daily intelligence publication and had received no regular briefings. He 
had been sent a copy of a less sensitive daily intelligence publication, to 
which he paid little attention. 

In the most recent transitions—for Reagan, Bush, and Clinton—the 
Agency dispatched more senior officers who were experienced in support¬ 
ing policymakers and were familiar with the full range of substantive 
issues about which the President-elect would be reading each day. In fact, 
in a great many of their daily sessions, the President-elect would simply 
read through the PDB with few if any questions. On other occasions, how¬ 
ever, he would ask follow-up questions about subjects treated in the writ¬ 
ten material or, less frequently, ask for an update on issues not discussed 
at all in the publication. In each of these cases it proved valuable to have 
senior officers in place who could elaborate on the material presented. 
Occasionally they explained Agency collection programs or the way the 
material related to covert action efforts under way. 

Fortunately, modern technology has provided a solution to what had 
been a problem in several early transitions: communications links to trans¬ 
mit securely the most timely and relevant intelligence information to the 
president-elect wherever he may be. Now it takes only the installation of a 
portable computer, printer, and secure fax machines in a hotel room to 
provide printed material on site that is literally indistinguishable from that 
which the President receives in Washington. This communications capa¬ 
bility permits the support team to draw on the full resources of the Intelli¬ 
gence Community in Washington and around the world to provide text, 
high-quality imagery, and graphics. 

By the time anyone reaches the presidency, that individual has long- 
established work habits that are not going to be changed by the CIA. The 
military approach of Eisenhower or the highly disciplined styles of Tru¬ 
man and Carter, for example, were vastly different from the more relaxed 
and less predictable approaches of Kennedy, Reagan, or Clinton. The job 


161 



of the CIA director and his representative is to accommodate each per¬ 
son’s style. Flexibility is critical on matters ranging from the scheduling 
of appointments to the presentation of the substantive material, where the 
length, level of generality, and subject matter must be within parameters 
suitable to the incoming President. 

The CIA must provide support not only to the incoming President 
but also to his senior assistants as well. This does not mean that subordi¬ 
nates should be shown the most sensitive material prior to inauguration, a 
practice successive outgoing presidents have made clear is not acceptable. 
Nevertheless, designees to Cabinet posts and other close aides to the Pres¬ 
ident-elect have intelligence needs and can be shown a full array of less 
sensitive materials. The CIA in the past has sometimes served these indi¬ 
viduals well and on other occasions has ignored them. Meeting this 
responsibility in a prompt and well-organized way would help establish a 
better relationship with an incoming administration. Other things being 
equal, it is obviously easier to accomplish this if the outgoing National 
Security Adviser is sympathetic to the need for a smooth transition in the 
intelligence area. It is easier still if the transition is between two presidents 
of the same political party. 

In the preelection period, it has proved feasible and desirable to pro¬ 
vide intelligence briefings to candidates from both or even multiple politi¬ 
cal parties. For the most part, this has been done; it certainly should be 
continued. For various reasons intelligence support was not provided to 
three major party candidates over the years. Barry Goldwater declined the 
Agency’s offer. George McGovern and Walter Mondale displayed only 
limited interest and when scheduling difficulties arose, the prospective 
CIA briefings fell by the boards. All of those who have been elected to 
date have accepted and benefited from the proffered intelligence support. 


Material That Was Welcome 

Whether in the preelection period, during the transition, or once in 
office, presidents almost without exception have concentrated on the cur¬ 
rent intelligence that related directly to the policy issues with which they 
were grappling. Similarly, they were also the most interested in oral brief¬ 
ings that related to those same issues. Written items or briefings were 
most welcome if they were concise, focused, and accompanied by graph¬ 
ics or imagery that helped get the point across quickly. The best received 
briefings were those delivered by experts who were obviously masters of 
their subject. Worldwide overviews provided by CIA’s directors were 
politely received but were sometimes judged to have repeated material 
available in the newspapers. 


162 



The substantive topics addressed in the material presented to a given 
president-elect are obviously a function of contemporaneous international 
developments and, therefore, vary significantly with each new incoming 
administration. There have been some nearly constant themes; however, 
such as developments in Russia, China, Korea, and the Middle East that 
are subjects the CIA knows it will be called on to address during each 
transition. Korea’s Kim Il-song was probably the only foreign leader 
whose activities were the subject of intelligence reporting over the whole 
of the 40-year period under review. 

Agency officers are well advised to be acutely conscious of the issues 
debated in the election campaign. Presidents-elect typically are well 
informed on such high-profile issues; in those areas they require only con¬ 
tinuing updates and help in sorting the vital nuggets from the torrent of 
information they will receive. CIA’s greater challenge with a new presi¬ 
dent is to provide useful intelligence on important issues that have not 
been highlighted in the campaign. On a continuing basis, roughly 60 per¬ 
cent of the items covered in the PDB are not addressed in the newspapers. 
This body of information, in particular, is likely to be unfamiliar to a pro¬ 
spective president. 

With virtually every new president, CIA has experimented with 
offerings of supplementary written intelligence to elaborate issues raised 
in the PDB. Only two presidents-elect have clearly welcomed such sup¬ 
plementary material and read it thoroughly when it was offered. Those 
two were otherwise quite different individuals: Eisenhower and Reagan. 
Other presidents who were presented such background material, espe¬ 
cially Nixon and Clinton, showed no sustained interest. Supplementary 
material should be made available to, but not pushed on, a president-elect 
who is already overburdened with reading material and short on time. 

The staff aides who support the president on security issues showed a 
deeper interest in the extra information. The best known of them, Kiss¬ 
inger, once told Helms, “You know the most useful document you fellows 
turn out is that Weekly Summary that you put together. That’s much more 
valuable than the daily stuff. That I can sit down on a Saturday morning 
and read and bring myself up to date and I think it’s a good publication.” 7 

As a result of the presidents’ preference for material that can be 
digested quickly, it has always been a challenge to interest them in longer 
analytic studies and the Intelligence Community’s formal National Intelli¬ 
gence Estimates. As a rule, presidents have read carefully only those stud¬ 
ies or Estimates specifically urged on them by the DCI or the National 
Security Adviser because they related directly to a policy matter of high, 
ongoing interest. Otherwise, the CIA has found the most success when it 
has gisted the findings of longer papers and integrated a summary into the 

7 Richard Helms, interview by R. Jack Smith, Washington, DC, 21 April 1982. 


163 



PDB. Indeed, the Agency has been told by National Security Advisers 
that the PDB was the only publication on any subject that they could be 
absolutely confident their principal would read on any given day. 

From the Agency’s perspective, there are clear advantages to having 
a new president come into office well informed not only about develop¬ 
ments abroad but also about CIA’s covert action and sensitive collection 
programs. Ford, Carter, Reagan, and Bush all were well briefed on such 
activities; together, their terms spanned a period of almost 20 years during 
which each, as an incoming president, had a thorough understanding of 
the Agency’s most sensitive activities. Three other presidents—Eisen¬ 
hower, Kennedy, and Clinton—entered office with limited familiarity with 
the Agency’s sensitive activities. Two others, Johnson and Nixon, had no 
up-to-date knowledge of those programs when they took office. 

Familiarity with sensitive programs does not necessarily result in 
support for them. Carter, for example, ordered a halt to some of the 
Agency’s sensitive undertakings within weeks of taking office. A presi¬ 
dent’s early awareness of such programs is, nevertheless, essential for 
him, the country, and the CIA. He needs to be in an informed position to 
defend and support these often politically charged activities or to change 
them if necessary to ensure their consistency with his overall foreign pol¬ 
icy objectives. If the Bay of Pigs fiasco taught nothing else, it was that 
Administration policy should drive covert action; covert action projects 
should not drive policy or color the intelligence provided. 

There has been an almost unbroken pattern over the years in expand¬ 
ing the support provided a new president and his team in areas beyond 
daily intelligence. Beginning with the Nixon transition, his key staffers— 
Kissinger and Eagleburger—were provided significant quantities of mate¬ 
rial for their own policy-planning purposes. This assistance continued 
during the Carter and Reagan transitions and was further expanded for the 
Bush and Clinton teams. For Clinton, the Agency provided background 
material for use by the President- and Vice President-elect and their senior 
staffs for telephone calls with foreign leaders, speeches and press confer¬ 
ences, and internal policy deliberations. The key to success in these 
efforts, as with intelligence generally, is to stick to the facts. The new 
team must know that CIA is neither defending policy for the old Adminis¬ 
tration nor creating it for the new one. 

There has never been any doubt that the PDB, right up to inaugura¬ 
tion day, is designed to address the interests of the president in office. 
Realistically, however, as the time for the turnover draws closer and as the 
incoming president is reading the PDB with greater care, the inevitable 
and probably appropriate tendency is to select and address substantive 
items in a way that meets the needs of the new president as well as the 
outgoing one. Fortunately, in practice this usually amounts only to adjust¬ 
ments on the margin. 


164 



The experience of the CIA in providing intelligence to 10 presi¬ 
dents—through nine quite different transitions—has led many of its offic¬ 
ers to appreciate the wisdom displayed by President Truman in a speech 
he delivered on 21 November 1953. On that occasion he observed, “The 
office of President of the United States now carries power beyond parallel 
in history. That is the principal reason that I am so anxious that it be a con¬ 
tinuing proposition and the successor to me and the successor to him can 
carry on as if no election had ever taken place.” Truman said, “That is 
why I am giving this president—this new president—more information 
than any other president had when he went into office.” 8 

President Truman was the first and the most senior of the intelligence 
briefers to be involved in the 40-year series of briefings that led up to 
CIA’s support of President Clinton in Little Rock in 1992. Truman person¬ 
ally had provided an intelligence overview to General Eisenhower on 
18 November 1952. In his speech to the Agency three days later he said, 
“It was my privilege.. .to brief the man who is going to take over the 
office of President of the United States.” It has been the CIA’s privilege as 
well, many times. 


8 The New York Times , 22 November 1952, pp. 1, 10. 




